UNITED NATIONS  
United Nations Interim 
Administration Mission in Kosovo  
  
UNMIK NATIONS UNIES 
Mission d’Administration Intérimaire 
des Nations Unies au Kosovo  
Investigation Task Force 
 
 
Irregularities in the procurement for the extension  of the  
Cargo Apron at Pristina Airport  (Case 0282/04) 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
1. This case arises out of an audit report dated 28  February 2003 into the financial 
statements of Pristina International Airport conduc ted by the Chartered 
Accountants, which led to an investigation concerni ng alleged corruption and 
irregularities arising in the course of procurement s and contracts at Pristina 
International Airport. 
 
2. There are four specific allegations in this repo rt of investigation: 
• tender specifications produced by the Pristina Air port for the cargo apron 
extension were insufficiently specific and without clear instructions for bidder 
contrary to UNMIK Finance Regulation 1999/2; 
• three persons on the bid opening committee were al so part of the technical 
evaluation committee contrary to procurement regula tions; 
• the contract for the cargo apron extension was not  provided to the UNMIK 
Office of the Legal Adviser for clearance; and 
• it is alleged that the Vendor was allowed to certi fy its work as per the 
requirements of the contract. 
 
 
II. APPLICABLE TERRITORIAL LAWS AND UNITED NATIONS 
PROCEDURAL RULES 
 
Section 1 of UNMIK Regulation 1999/24  dated 12 December 1999 as amended, 
states that the law applicable in Kosovo shall be: 
a) “The regulations promulgated by the Special Repr esentative of the 
Secretary General (SRSG) and subsidiary instruments  issued pursuant to 
those regulations; and  
b) The Law in force in Kosovo on 22 March 1989.” 
 
UN Staff Regulations 1.2 (b)  stipulates, “Staff members shall uphold the highes t 
standards of efficiency, competence and integrity” 
 
UNMIK Finance Administrative Instruction 1999/2 on Public Procurement using 
Kosovo Consolidated Budget Funds  provides that: 
Article 4 1  – “Competition among and participation in the proc urement process 
shall be maximised.”  2 
Article 4.1.1  – “All Suppliers and Contractors and their tenders  shall be treated 
fairly, equally, and non-discriminatorily, without favouritism or prejudice and each 
Tender shall be judged on its merits.” 
Article 4.3.3 . – “If a consultant or any principal, officer or e mployee of such 
consultant has participated or will participate in any manner in the preparation of 
the UNMIK Kosovo Interim Administration’s Tendering  for a contract, including 
but not limited to preparations of specifications o r any other Tender Documents, 
no such consultant nor any principal officer or emp loyee of such consultant, no 
“related person” nor any “illegal payer” may tender  for or sponsor or participate in 
the Tendering for such contract.” 
Article 23.3  – “All tender documents shall contain complete inf ormation in neutral 
and objective terms so that there can be full and f air competition among all 
suppliers. In particular Tender Documents must incl ude the advertisement and ..” 
Article 23.3.4  – “…full technical specifications, including the t ime limits for 
delivery and completion.” 
 
Staff Rule 110.1: Misconduct . “Failure by a staff member to comply with his or her 
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations , the Staff Regulations and the 
Staff Rules or other relevant administrative issuan ces, or to observe the standards of 
conduct expected of an international civil servant,  may amount to unsatisfactory 
conduct within the meaning of staff regulation 10.2 , leading to the institution of 
disciplinary measures for misconduct.” 
 
III. METHODOLOGY  
 
3. This investigation was conducted pursuant to Exe cutive Decision No 2003/16 on 
the establishment of the Investigation Task Force. The ITF investigators 
conducted an enquiry into the allegations raised by  interviews with persons 
indicated to be witnesses and persons potentially i mplicated in the allegations; by 
obtaining documents from the Pristina Airport admin istration and from Pillar IV, 
which were then analysed for relevance to the inqui ry at hand. 
 
IV. BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
 
4. Pristina International Airport constitutes a sta te owned enterprise under 
Yugoslavian law. The assets of the airport include the runways, terminal 
buildings, hanger, fuel storage facilities and equi pment. During the period 
covered by this investigation, from 2001 until 2003 , they were maintained by the 
Public Enterprise Airport Pristina, (PEAP) in coope ration with Military Units of the 
Kosovo Force (KFOR). Pursuant to United Nations Sec urity Council Resolution 
1244 dated 10 June 1999, and UNMIK Regulation No 1/ 1999 dated 25 July 1999. 
UNMIK is mandated to administer the territory of Ko sovo, including state owned 
and publicly owned assets. This includes Pristina I nternational Airport. 
 
5. Until the end of June 2002, responsibility for t he administration of the Pristina 
Airport was entrusted to the Civil Administration P illar (Pillar II) of UNMIK, 
including Official 1 and Official 2. Pillar II supe rvised DOTI Official 1 (Department 
of Transport and Infrastructure). The DOTI was late r known as the Transport 
Sector of the UNMIK Directorate of Infrastructure A ffairs. DOTI Official 1 left 
UNMIK at the end of June 2002. DOTI Official 2 was recruited by the DOTI as an 
international staff member on 31 July 2000 in charg e of airport operations,  3 
reporting to DOTI Official 1, and continued in this  role until 30 September 2001. 
Engineering expertise was provided by a series of e ngineers seconded from the 
armed forces of a United Nations member state, spec ifically Airport Engineer 1, 
Airport Engineer 2, and Airport Engineer 3, and lat er by a consultant from the 
Consulting Company. 
 
6. On 1 July 2002, the responsibility for the admin istration of the Airport passed 
from Pillar II to the Kosovo Trust Agency (KTA) and  Pillar IV. The Divisional 
Manager was appointed. Under him were the PEAP Offi cial and ATCS Official 
(Air Traffic Control Services). 
 
7. On 1 April 2004 Pristina International Airport, which had until that time been 
under the jurisdiction of KFOR was handed over to c ivilian jurisdiction, under 
ICAO regulations. 
 
8. It is against this background of change that pro curement procedures relating to 
the following contract have been examined. 
 
 
V. INVESTIGATION DETAILS  
 
9. This part of the investigation relates to a tend er for a contract for the extension of 
the Cargo Terminal Apron at Pristina Airport. The v alue of the contract was 
€774,318.63. 
Allegation 1  
 
(Specifically, the tender documents for the cargo a pron did not comply with the 
requirements of Article 23.4 of the UNMIK Finance A dministrative Instruction 1999/2 
on Public Procurement using Kosovo Consolidated Bud get Funds, as they were 
based on summary documents and did not include clea r instructions on drawings 
and plans.) 
 
10. A note from the Project Engineer at the Evaluat ion Company to the PEAP 
Official, dated 31 January 2001, indicates that the  Evaluation Company was 
commissioned to produce a preliminary design for th e Cargo Terminal at Pristina 
Airport. The design also provided for the construct ion of the Cargo Apron 
Extension.  
 
11. A prequalification evaluation was held 5 April 2001 as a result of which five 
companies were pre-qualified to submit bids for the  Cargo Apron Extension. Four 
companies submitted bids, and following an evaluati on, the contract was 
awarded to the Vendor. A contract was signed for th e Cargo Apron Extension on 
11 September 2001. 
 
12. A letter from the Vendor to UNMIK and PEAP date d 9 May 2001 indicates that it 
submitted a bid for the Cargo Apron Extension. The tender documents include 
what appears to be a section from the preliminary d esign documents produced by 
the Evaluation Company. Specifically, it includes a  section entitled ”Bills of 
Quantities” from pages 17 and 18 of the Evaluation Company preliminary design 
documents. 
  4 
13. An interoffice memorandum providing an “outstan ding issues update to Official 
2”, from DOTI Official 3 to Staff member 1 at the o ffice of Official 2 dated 18 May 
2001, could give rise to the suggestion that offers  were provided by companies 
on 28 May 2001, and the Vendor had been chosen for the works in advance. 
However, a more likely explanation is the date of t he interoffice memorandum 
has been incorrectly dated, since the document cont ains reference dates relating 
to project “events” which post date 18 May 2001. At  paragraph 2b, the interoffice 
memorandum states that the Cargo Apron invitation t o tender was based on 
summary documents.  
 
14. At paragraph 4 of the Cargo Apron Extension eva luation report dated 2 August 
2001, the committee notes that the bidding document s did not include clear 
instructions on drawing and plans. It therefore was  recommended that 
negotiations be held with the lowest bidder, the Ve ndor, on further details of the 
scope of works. 
 
15. In combination, the two documents suggest that the tender documents did not 
comply with Article 23.3 of the UNMIK Finance Admin istrative Instruction 1999/2 
on Public Procurement using Kosovo Consolidated Bud get Funds. 
 
16. When asked whether he/she was of the view that the tender documents complied 
with the provisions of Article 23.3 of the UNMIK Fi nance Administrative 
Instruction 1999/2 on Public Procurement using Koso vo Consolidated Budget 
Funds, DOTI Official 2 conceded that if an engineer  was asked this question, 
he/she would indicate that the tender specification s were technically deficient and 
did not comply with Article 23.3. 
 
17. DOTI Official 2 explained that the technical de tails of the Cargo Apron extension 
project were taken from the cargo terminal study pr oduced by the Evaluation 
Company and pasted into the tender document specifi cations. Thereafter, it was 
up to the company winning the tender to demonstrate  that they could fulfil the 
specification. 
 
18. According to DOTI Official 2, Airport Engineer 1, who arrived shortly after the 
tender had been launched, had been angry with the E valuation Company for 
allowing DOTI Official 2 to send out excerpts of th eir study as the tender 
specifications. Airport Engineer 1 had also express ed concern at the method 
used for preparing the tender documents, as from an  engineering point of view 
the tenders did not contain sufficient detail. Howe ver, DOTI Official 2 stated that if 
the Evaluation Company had been asked to prepare th e tender documents, it 
would have cost more money. He/she had therefore pr epared the tender 
documents himself/herself and sent them to a Procur ement Official at the CPE to 
review and help him with the procurement exercise. 
 
19. Assistance from the CPE was provided primarily by a CPE Procurement Officer, 
and to a lesser extent by the Procurement Official,  as to the procurement 
documents and rules. However, DOTI Official 2 expre ssed the view that neither 
the Procurement Official nor the CPE Procurement Of ficer would have had the 
technical expertise or time to review the technical  specifications. 
  5 
20. DOTI Official 2 emphasised that there was no en gineering expert to support 
his/her work at the time the tender was launched, a  fact that made his/her work 
very difficult. 
 
Allegations 2 & 3 
 
(Specifically, three of the persons on the bid open ing committee and evaluation 
committees were the same parties who should not hav e carried out both tasks.) 
 
and  
 
(The contract for the Cargo Apron Extension was not  channelled through the Office 
of the Legal Adviser.)  
 
 
21. The evaluation report dated 2 August 2001 is si gned by three parties, who are 
also listed as having attended the bid opening sess ion. This indicates that the 
composition of the bid opening committee and the ev aluation committee 
overlapped. 
 
22. When asked about this issue in interview DOTI O fficial 2 confirmed that he/she 
was both on the bid opening committee and was a mem ber of the evaluation 
committee. He/she added that the people who evaluat ed the offers signed the 
evaluation report. This is in conflict with UN regu lations, which segregate the two 
roles. An interoffice memorandum dated 24 September  2001 indicates that the 
contract for the Cargo Apron Extension had not been  channelled through the 
Office of the Legal Adviser.  
 
Allegation 4 
 
(Specifically, that the Vendor produced its own tes t results to confirm the quality of its 
own work on the Cargo Apron, resulting in a conflic t of interest.) 
 
23. An interoffice memorandum from Staff member 2 t o the Procurement Official, 
signed by DOTI Official 1 dated 18 October 2001, in dicates that DOTI Official 1 
authorised the soil stabilisation work. The memoran dum also adds that the work 
was inadvertently not included in the original cont ract. 
 
24. DOTI Official 2 told the ITF that in order to p rogress the cargo apron tender, 
he/she had to organise a geographical survey. He/sh e added that only after the 
tests were done could the tender go ahead. However,  the evaluation report at 
paragraph 4 suggests that information on the nature  of the ground does not 
appear to have been included in the tender document s. In addition, a letter from 
the Vendor to UNMIK and PEAP dated 27 June 2001, bu t apparently not 
received at UNMIK and PEAP until 17 October 2001, a ccording to a manuscript 
note signed by Airport Engineer 1 at the bottom of the letter, suggests that it 
carried out its own soil tests.  
 
25. A letter from the Vendor to PEAP dated 18 Septe mber 2003 suggests that the 
Vendor also produced its own bearing capacity repor t for the Cargo Apron, 
thereby “self certifying” its own work. Whilst the tender documents at page 5,  6 
reference 11.4, provide for the Contractor to pay l iquidated damages in the event 
that the “load-bearing “ capacity of the apron is l ess than foreseen in the contract, 
upon completion of the work, the contract is silent  as to whom should carry out 
the tests. However, it is questionable as to whethe r the Vendor should have 
carried it out, since it presents a conflict of int erest.  
 
26.  When asked about this in interview, the Divisi onal Manager stated: 
“Without seeing any other documents, on the face of  it, it does appear that there 
could be a conflict of interest here. But the repor t was produced by a professional 
pavement engineer, at a laboratory. Therefore, one can assume a certain degree 
of integrity.” 
27.  The ITF notes that the PEAP Official indicated  that he/she was unhappy about 
the Vendor self-certifying its work and he/she comm ented that the airport 
engineer should have questioned it. 
 
28. The ITF does not have sufficient technical know ledge to assess the adequacy of 
the Vendor’s work. However, a letter from the Divis ional Manager to Staff 
Member 3 dated 25 August 2002 gives rise to the pos sibility that it was not up to 
specification in certain areas.  
 
VI. CONCLUSIONS  
 
29. Evidence indicates that the tender documents fo r the cargo apron did not comply 
with the requirements of Article 23.4 of the UNMIK Finance Administrative 
Instruction 1999/2 on Public Procurement using Koso vo Consolidated Budget 
Funds, as they were based on summary documents and did not include clear 
instructions on drawings and plans. This appears to  have been due to an attempt 
to cut costs in preparing the tender documents, as well as a lack of appropriately 
qualified staff. 
 
30. In mitigation, the inadequacy of the tender doc uments also appears to have been 
due to ignorance as to the appropriate quantity of detail to be included in the 
tender documents rather than a deliberate act calcu lated to manipulate the tender 
process. 
 
31. DOTI Official 2 is primarily responsible for th e shortcomings in the tender 
documents although, DOTI Official 1 and the CPE mus t also bear a certain 
amount of responsibility. 
 
32. The shortcomings in the tender documents are li kely to have prejudiced some 
companies in their decision as to submitting bids f or the tenders, since they may 
not have been clear as to the detailed requirements  of the tender and therefore 
submitted insufficient detail in their bids as a re sult.  
 
33. Three persons are indicated to have both attend ed the bid opening session as 
well as been on the tender evaluation committee, in  conflict with UN regulations. 
 
34. Evidence indicates the contract for the Cargo A pron Extension was not 
channelled through the Office of the Legal Adviser.  
  7 
35. Evidence indicates that the Vendor produced its  own bearing capacity report for 
the Cargo Apron, thereby “self certifying” its own work and presenting a potential 
conflict of interest.  
 
VII. RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
36. It is recommended that UNMIK ensure that all co ntracts are referred for legal 
advice before signature in order to reduce potentia l liability issues and avoid a 
recurrence of the problems of this instant case. (I V04/282/01) 
37. It is recommended that UNMIK ensure that staff understand and comply with the 
requirements of the UNMIK Public Procurement Regula tion No 2004/3. 
(IV04/282/02) 
38. It is recommended that UNMIK ensures that all w ork conducted under contract, in 
which the final product has to be evaluated, that s aid the evaluation be carried 
out by a suitably qualified, independent entity. (I V04/282/03) 
 
39. It is recommended that DPKO take appropriate ac tion with respect to DOTI 
Official 2 (currently serving with MONUC). (IV04/28 2/04) 
 
 
 