NSA Global SIGINT Highlights 
US Intercepts Abe's Secret Plan on Carbon Emissions
WikiLeaks release: July 31, 2015
This is a Secret US National Security Agency (NSA) report derived from intelligence intercepts of officials 
within the Japanese Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, shortly 
before the official visit of Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe to Washington DC, for talks with President 
George W Bush. Abe's government is reported to have been considering not informing the United States 
of the Prime Minister's plan to reduce carbon emissions, on the basis that the plan might be opposed by 
the Bush administration. As the report shows, the National Security Agency was aware both of the plan 
not to inform the United States, and of the government's change of mind, which was taken at a briefing at 
the Prime Minister's official residence.Description
Keywords:National Security Agency, NSA, Top Secret, SIGINT, NOFORN,
intelligence, intercept, espionage, United States, USA, Japan, Ministry
of Economy Trade and Industry, METI, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, MFA,
Prime Minister, Shinzo Abe, Washington, carbon emissions, Abe
initiative, environment, bilateral relations, climate change
Restraint:SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN
Title:Japanese to State Goal of Reducing Carbon Emissions by Half by 2050
Date:2007
Organisation:National Security Agency (NSA)
Author:Summary Services Office
Link: https://wikileaks.org/nsa-japan
Pages:1Japanese to State Goal of Reducing Carbon Emissions by Half by 2050 
(S//SI//NF)
(S//NF) In preparing for the 26 to 27 April visit to Washington by 
Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, the Japanese Ministry of Economy,  
Trade, and Industry (METI) apparently wanted to come up with a simple  
message regarding climate change with which the U.S. can agree. 
Accordingly, METI has pushed three principles: technical development,  
energy conservation and nuclear energy, and participation of all 
countries in the future framework. Meanwhile, the Ministry of Foreign  
Affairs (MFA) apparently wants Abe to mention at the bilateral summit  
Japan's goal of reducing carbon emissions by half by 2050 as part of 
the "Abe initiative," which will be announced in late May. The MFA 
was considering not informing the U.S. in advance of its intention, 
because the ministry did not expect Washington to approve of such a 
goal, based on the U.S. reaction to climate change issues so far. It 
was apparently decided at a briefing at the Prime Minister's official  
residence that Abe will clearly state the goal at the bilateral 
summit, with advance notification to the United States. Japan 
anticipates no major harm to the Japanese­U.S. relationship as a 
result. 
Unconventional 
 
Japanese leadership 
 
Z­3/OO/8432­07, 181733Z 
 