NSA Global SIGINT Highlights 
US Sets NSA on Japan over Cherry Feud
WikiLeaks release: July 31, 2015
This is a Secret US National Security Agency (NSA) 2009 report derived from intelligence intercepts of 
officials within the Japanese Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. The report indicates that the 
National Security Agency knew of the options under consideration within the Ministry for how Japan 
should seek to patch up bilateral relations with the US over a trade dispute concerning the import of US 
cherries. Among the options being discussed were the use of back channels to share information with 
Washington. The report indicates that the main Japanese incentive is the avoidance of politicization of the 
trade issue in Washington. Description
Keywords:National Security Agency, NSA, Top Secret, SIGINT, NOFORN,
intelligence, intercept, espionage, United States, USA, Japan, European
Union, EU, Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Fisheries, MAFF, US
Department of Agriculture, food imports, trade liberalization, agriculture,
inspections, beef, cherries
Restraint:TOP SECRET//COMINT//ORCON/NOFORN
Title:Japanese Strive to Avoid Damage to U.S. Relations Over Cherry
Imports
Date:2009
Organisation:National Security Agency (NSA)
Author:Summary Services Office
Link: https://wikileaks.org/nsa-japan
Pages:1Japanese Strive to Avoid Damage to U.S. Relations Over Cherry Imports  
(TS//SI//OC/NF)
(TS//SI//OC/NF) Officials in the Japanese Ministry of Agriculture, 
Forestry, and Fisheries (MAFF) appeared recently to be seeking ways 
to prevent damage to relations with the U.S. over the ministry's 
decision to delay the importation of U.S.­origin cherries, a decision  
driven by Japanese politicians and growers. MAFF was alarmed by the 
very strong reaction of the U.S. Department of Agriculture to Tokyo's  
ruling that imports could not commence until the end of this month, 
when a pilot program involving inspections in the U.S. Pacific 
Northwest by a MAFF inspector is expected to be concluded 
satisfactorily. One approach under consideration is to have the 
ministry admit to Washington, through back channels, that the 
decision had been the product of political pressure. Also, it was 
recommended that the U.S. be notified that­­unlike in the beef 
dispute­­imports could begin as soon as the result of on­site 
inspection is confirmed, rather than after the inspector had returned  
to Japan and more tests conducted. The principal fear among the 
Japanese is that the issue will become similarly politicized, 
possibly at senior levels, in Washington. 
Unconventional
 
Japanese governmental 
 
Z­3/OO/515570­09, 221708Z 
 