 1            UNITED 
NATIONS  
   United Nations Interim     
   Administration Mission  
in Kosovo   
UNMIK NATIONS UNIES  
Mission d’Administration 
Intérimaire des Nations    
       Unies au Kosovo  
 
INVESTIGATION TASK FORCE 
 
Allegations of Bribes/Kickbacks for Employment 
at Pristina Airport (Case No. 377/04) 
 
I - Allegations  
1. This report summarizes the investigation into a report supplied to the Investigation Task 
Force (ITF) alleging that “kickbacks” had been paid  to an airport official in order to obtain 
employment at Pristina Airport. The allegations wer e contained in a confidential police 
report written by Kosovo Police Service Officer 1 ( KPS) serving in the Pristina Airport 
Border Police, but originated from Non Staff member  1. The allegations specifically stated 
that Non Staff member 1, and others, paid kickbacks  to certain high-ranking Pristina Airport 
employees in the hope of receiving employment. 
II - Background  
2.  As this case was referred to the Department of Just ice on 24 September 2004 and is 
currently under two separate judicial investigation s, the ITF did not continue with its 
administrative investigations. This report summariz es the activities of the ITF. It should 
also be noted that dissemination of this report sho uld be severely restricted given the 
ongoing criminal inquiries. 
III - Investigative Details  
3. A separate case - ITF Case No. 2l5/04 - relating  to requests for sexual favours in return for 
employment had already been under investigation whe n this report was received. Case No. 
215-04 was subsequently closed due to the problem t hat none of the “victims" were willing 
to come forward and file an official statement on t he matter. The reasons given to the ITF for 
this fear of making a report was related to the thr eat of losing already obtained employment 
at the airport, or to jeopardize marriages and repu tations. 
4. Non Staff member 1’s statements provided to the ITF Investigators, disclosed the following 
two distinct cases: 
Case A  
5. On 25-26 July 2004, Non Staff member 1 alleges t o have visited Official 1 (Pristina Airport) 
asking how he/she could obtain employment at Pristi na Airport. He/she stated that Official 1  2 had replied that this was possible, but only via th e payment of a considerable amount of 
money. 
6. Non Staff member 1 was aware that two other pers ons, Non Staff member 2 and Non Staff 
member 3 had already paid €7,000.00 each, to Offici al 1 through the same procedure, in the 
hope of receiving employment at Pristina Airport. 
7. On either 30 or 31 July 2004, Non Staff member 1  said he/she was contacted by Official 1’s 
daughter, Official 2’s Secretary, requesting him/he r to come to Restaurant 1 located in 
Hajvali. 
8. Non Staff member 1 stated that he/she was person ally greeted upon his arrival by Security 
Official, Official 2’s Secretary and Official 1 and  another person, male, but name unknown, 
who was there seeking a similar employment route. 
9. According to Non Staff member 1, the other perso n paid, in his presence, the sum of 
€10.000,00 to Official 2’s Secretary, just before N on Staff member 1 himself/herself handed 
€5.000,00 to the same person. 
10. After both persons had paid the agreed upon cas h amounts, they were both requested to sign 
three different coloured books entitled “Airport St aff”, and then asked to leave because they 
would be contacted by telephone as to the details o f their future employment at Pristina 
Airport. 
11. Non Staff member 1 told the ITF that he/she was  called again, two days later, in order to pay 
an additional € 1.000,00, which he/she had then giv en to Official 2’s Secretary, in the 
presence of his/her father, Official 1, during a di nner that Official 1 and his daughter were 
having at the same mentioned restaurant. Non Staff member 1 also said that he/she paid 
approximately € 180 for that night’s dinner and tha t he/she was called, always by Official 2’s 
Secretary, to two further dinners at Restaurant 2 a nd at Restaurant 1.  Non-Staff member 1 
was requested to pay, amounts of € 225 and € 190 fo r the dinners. Non Staff member 1 stated 
that during the dinner, the following Pristina Airp ort staff were present: Security Official, a 
Secretary, Official 2, X-Ray Official, Official 1, Official 2’s Secretary, Official 3, Official 4 
and one person who only spoke English (name unknown ). This person may have been 
Official 5, because Non Staff member 1 stated that this person was not a Kosovar, but an 
International and furthermore, at a certain point w hen this person was not present, all the 
others congratulated Non Staff member 1 for his new  job. The Investigators believe that the 
above-mentioned Airport staff were attempting to de monstrate to Non Staff member 1 that 
they were in contact with the competent person who could authorize his employment. 
Case-B 
12. Non Staff member 1 stated that he/she was aware  of another case of kickbacks for Pristina 
Airport employment, which occurred circa 6 Septembe r 2004. Non Staff member 1, in his 
role as the owner of a hamburger/sandwich stand/res taurant - well-frequented by airport 
employees – said he/she was contacted by KPS office r 2 who requested information in 
relation to what business connections Non Staff mem ber 4 had within Pristina Airport.  3 13.  Non Staff member 1 stated that Non Staff member 5, the wife of KPS Officer 2 met Non 
Staff member 4 in the clothing boutique where he/sh e worked, while he/she was 
purchasing airport uniforms. At that time, he/she h ad asked him/her how to obtain a job 
at the airport. He/she allegedly replied he/she had  no problems in getting him/her a job at 
Pristina Airport due to his/her important airport c ontacts, but it would cost him/her € 
3.000,00. 
V – Conclusion  
14. As ITF referred this case to the Department of Justice on 24 September 2004, no further 
action was taken by ITF. Therefore, no conclusions can be drawn at this stage on the basis of 
ITF Investigations. 
V - Recommendations  
15. The ITF offers the following recommendations: 
Recommendation No. 1 : Due to the fact that this case has already been r eferred to the 
International Prosecutor and is currently being inv estigated by the 
Financial Investigation Unit, the ITF recommends th at UNMIK 
Pillar IV take no administrative action against Air port staff until 
the/ judicial process is finalized (IV04/377/01);  
Recommendation No. 2 : Should the Airport staff not be criminally charge d by the 
Department of Justice, ITF recommends that UNMIK Pil lar IV 
should consider appropriate administrative action a gainst 
implicated Pristina Airport staff in the light of t he Department of 
Justice’s findings (IV04/377/02). 
 