 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNITED NATIONS                                           
NATIONS UNIES 
 
This report is protected under the provisions of 
ST/SGB/273, paragraph 18, of 7 September 1994" 
 
 
 
 
I.   
 
 
 
 
OFFICE OF INTERNAL OVERSIGHT SERVICES 
INVESTIGATIONS DIVISION 
 
 
 
 
REDACTED 
REPORT OF INVESTIGATION 
 
 
ID CASE NO. 0374/04 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 February 2005 
 
 
 
 STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL   `   1 INVESTIGATION INTO ALLEGED IRREGULARITIES IN THE PR OCUREMENT OF 
PERSONAL DIGITAL ASSISTANTS  (Case 0374/04)  
 
 
I.     BACKGROUND 
 
1. The Investigations Division of the Office of Int ernal Oversight Services (ID/OIOS) 
received information relating to problems in a proc urement exercise for the purchase of Personal 
Digital Assistants (PDA) undertaken in April 2004 b y UNMIK’s Directorate of Rural Affairs 
(DRA), Kosovo.  A letter of complaint from one of t he bidders alleged possible irregularities in 
the bid evaluation and selection process.  
 
2. An internal Pillar II review by the Policy Revie w and Internal Oversight Unit (PRIO) 
highlighted possible irregularities in its prelimin ary report on the procurement exercise with a 
recommendation for further investigation. This repo rt was provided to ID/OIOS with a request 
for further investigation. Based on the issues rais ed in the complaint and subsequently in the 
PRIO Unit’s preliminary report, ID/OIOS investigate d the entire tender process to determine 
whether any violations of UN rules had occurred. 
 
3. The Directorate of Rural Affairs (DRA) is locate d within UNMIK Civil Administration 
(Pillar II); it was formed in October 2001 out of t he former Department of Agriculture in the 
Joint Administrative Interim Structure. The DRA com prises Veterinary Services & Veterinary 
Border Control, Phytosanitary Border Control and Pu blic Forests.  The DRA remains a reserved 
area under Security Council Resolution 1244 and the  staff are United Nations staff members 
subject to the UN Rules and Regulations. Also, the DRA undertakes its own procurement for all 
of the divisions within the DRA. 
 
 
II.     INVESTIGATION DETAILS 
 
4. ID/OIOS Investigators conducted interviews of al l witnesses relevant to this matter, 
including detailed interviews of the alleged subjec ts; collected documents and records 
concerning the procurement, including all the bids submitted and the bid evaluation documents: 
and analyzed the evidence.    
 
5. The ID/OIOS investigation also reviewed the proj ect funded by the European Agency for 
Reconstruction (EAR) called “Strengthening of Publi c Veterinary Services in Kosovo” 
(SPUVESEK), which identified the need for Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs) to undertake the 
task of Identification & Registration (I & R) of an imals in Kosovo. The intent was to provide 
veterinarians in the field with electronic devices to record all movements of animals in Kosovo. 
 
6. In late 2002, the EAR consultant prepared the te chnical specifications for the PDAs based 
on the proposal in SPUVESEK’s inception report of A ugust 2002. Based on these specifications, 
the DRA launched an initial tender in November 2003  for the PDAs, inclusive of both hardware 
and software.  All bids submitted exceeded the amou nt set aside for the purchase of the PDAs 
(€170,000), therefore that tender was cancelled in February 2004 based on advice from the 
Central Procurement Entity (CPE).     `   2 7. A second tender for the purchase of the required  PDAs was then launched in April 2004, 
using the same technical specifications. For the se cond tender, the DRA provided the bidders 
with a price ceiling of €135,000 and requested that  they state the number of devices in total that 
the company could offer within the price ceiling. O n 19 May 2004, the deadline for the 
submission of bids, the DRA had received eight bids . As required, the bids were opened and 
certified by members of a bid-opening panel consist ing of DRA logistics officer 1, a DRA 
procurement officer, DRA employee 1 and a DRA finan ce officer.  The complainant told 
ID/OIOS that the bid opening process occurred witho ut incident and in accordance with correct 
procedural requirements. 
 
8. In the preliminary PRIO report, the price estima tes as stated in the EAR consultant’s 
inception report showed five different PDA models w ith integrated scanner capabilities. The 
prices of the PDA models shown ranged from USD $323 .38 to USD $818.30. ID/OIOS 
adduced that the initial estimates were of regular PDAs, not the more rugged PDAs specified 
in the technical specifications and required for us e by veterinarians working in inclement 
weather conditions.  ID/OIOS also found that the es timates were obtained from the Internet for 
the inception report and did not include the featur es that would make it technically appropriate 
for the veterinarians in the field. The actual tech nical specifications prepared by the EAR 
consultant later envisaged a more rugged, durable p roduct that would be water, dust and drop 
resistant. The price per unit of “rugged” PDAs, as required by the technical specifications, is 
higher than the initial estimate made in the incept ion report. ID/OIOS verified this through 
Internet research.  
 
9.  The complainant raised two main issues: firstly , that the bid submitted by Vendor 1, was 
the lowest bid because it offered the most number o f devices within the ceiling price. Secondly, 
although two other bidders offered the same product  as the winning bidder, but at a lower price, 
they had not been selected. The PRIO preliminary re port also identified these issues. ID/OIOS 
Investigators reviewed all eight bids submitted and  noted that DRA logistics officer 1 had 
disqualified two, Vendor 2 and Vendor 3, because ne ither the Vendor 2 nor the Vendor 3 bid was 
substantially responsive in that the total price of  the product offered exceeded the price ceiling of 
€135,000. During his/her pre-qualification of bids,  DRA logistics officer 1 noted that Vendor 2 
did not include taxes “CIP” Pristina Kosovo as requ ired in the bid document, meaning the total 
price would exceed the ceiling of €135,000 by more than €17,000; and Vendor 3’s total offer did 
not include its  yearly €16,500 maintenance surcharge fee, causing its bid t o exceed the stated 
price ceiling by more than €15,000.    
 
10. In order to find out why the lowest bidder, Ven dor 1, was still not selected, ID/OIOS 
spoke separately with two members of the bid evalua tion panel who explained the evaluation 
process and why the panel recommended the selected bidder, Vendor 4. ID/OIOS was told that 
the  evaluation panel examined the bid documents submit ted by the six pre-qualified bidders and 
made comments and annotations on the table provided  to them by the DRA logistics officer. The 
evaluation panel relied heavily on the technical ex pertise of one panel member, DRA logistics 
officer 2, who was responsible for the evaluation o f the technical features of the PDAs offered. 
DRA logistics officer 2 told ID/OIOS that his/her handwritten entries on th e table were based 
on the discussions of the entire evaluation panel, but that he/she independently verified that the 
product offered by each bidder did possess the decl ared features and that he/she checked the  `   3 technical data submitted by the individual bidders with the product datasheet and brochures 
included in the bidding documents.   
 
11. In terms of the priority selection criteria of the evaluation panel, DRA logistics officer 2 
stated that the DRA had advised them to monitor not  only the technical specifications but to 
focus particularly on Section VII of the Bidding Do cuments “Obligatory Requirements to be 
fulfilled by the bidders.” DRA logistics officer 2  highlighted the criteria of after-warranty 
repair service located within Kosovo and repair or replacement within five working days 
(based on the existing regulations in Kosovo as to notification, registration and recording of 
information concerning movement of animals within f ive days of the movement).  Therefore, if 
a PDA device used for the communication of such dat a broke down and was not replaced 
within a week, farmers and veterinarians would run the risk of not complying with the law. 
 
12.  ID/OIOS requested DRA logistics officer 2  to review each individual bid and to 
explain his/her 
13.   annotations.  DRA logistics officer 2  pointed out that Vendor 4, Vendor 5 and 
Vendor 6 had offered virtually the same technical d evice. He/she found out that the 
“Gotive H41 IB” model offered by Vendor 6 did not s ubstantially differ from the 
“Gotive H41” model offered by Vendor 4 and Vendor 5 . DRA logistics officer 2  
stated that the “Gotive H41” model complied with al l the requirements laid out in 
the technical specifications and pointed out that t his device was very well protected 
against environmental impact, notably in the field.    
  
 
13. According to DRA logistics officer 2 , the PDA model offered by Vendor 1 was not a 
rugged PDA; it did not comply with the IP54 protect ion standards essential for outdoor use.  
At first glance, Vendor 1 appeared to be the lowest  bidder, because they offered the largest 
number of PDAs for the stated price ceiling. Howeve r, the product did not comply with the 
technical specifications and hence would be inappro priate for use by KVS veterinarians. As 
such, the members of the evaluation panel did not s hort-list Vendor 1 for further examination.   
 
14. However, the complainant contended that the PDA mod el offered by Vendor 1 did match 
the technical specifications sought by the DRA and referred ID/OIOS to “Vendor 1’s” 
handwritten responses to Section VI “Technical Spec ifications” of the Bidding documents. These 
handwritten responses simply mark “Y” for yes and “ N” for No as to whether the product 
conformed to the technical specifications. The hand written version shows a “Y” in the column 
next to the technical requirement of environmental sealing.  Investigators noted that the annex 
submitted by the complainant is different from the typed page of the Vendor 1 response to 
Section VI found in all three sets of bid documents  submitted to the DRA at the bid opening.  
The typed page clearly indicates that the product d oes not contain the required dust and weather 
resistance feature required.  
 
15. ID/OIOS learned that Vendor 1 did not retain a copy of the completed bid documents 
submitted to the DRA as they had only prepared thre e sets, all of which were submitted to the 
DRA on 19 May. The complainant seemed unaware of th e discrepancy between the two 
versions. ID/OIOS verified that the PDA model offer ed by Vendor 1 (EIA PD264-XB) does not  `   4 contain the IP54 feature that would ensure environm ental sealing against dust and rain. It did 
appear from the complainant’s statements to ID/OIOS  that Vendor 1 did not fully understand the 
bidding document requirements and thus failed to of fer a technically compliant product that 
would be appropriate for outdoor use by Kosovo vete rinarians. 
 
16. ID/OIOS also addressed the issue of why Vendor 4 was selected even though two other 
bidders offered the same model PDA at a lower price . Based on the technical specifications, the 
evaluation panel narrowed the choices to three bidd ers whose product was technically compliant 
with the specifications.  Two panel members told ID /OIOS that among the three short-listed 
bidders, the Vendor 4  offer seemed to be slightly more expensive than th at of Vendor 5 and 
Vendor 6.  A more thorough review indicated that bo th Vendor 5 and Vendor 6 did not include 
VAT in their offers; therefore, the total bid by th ese two vendors did not offer the best value. 
In addition, neither Vendor 5 nor Vendor 6  offered servicing and repair of the PDAs in Kosovo  
and the required five days turnaround time to repla ce a faulty device.  Only the selected bidder, 
Vendor 4, offered these two features along with a t raining component for the price submitted.  
Given the fact that approximately 70 veterinarians were to be equipped with these PDAs, the 
training component, although not included in the ob ligatory requirements, seemed to be a 
valuable addition to the evaluation panel members.  In the end, the evaluation panel members 
selected Vendor 4 over the two other short-listed b idders because that bid included training as 
part of the total package thereby offering the best  value within the stated price ceiling for 
DRA-KVS.       
 
 
III.     FINDINGS 
 
17.   ID/OIOS finds that the DRA finally procured P DAs from Vendor 4 based on the fact 
that the product offered was in compliance with the  technical specifications and met the 
requirements of the bid specifications.  The lower price estimates quoted in the inception report 
related to standard office use PDAs as opposed to r ugged, environmentally sealed PDAs that 
would be suitable for outdoor use.   
 
18. ID/OIOS also finds that the evaluation panel se lected Vendor 4 because it was the only 
bidder that complied with all technical specificati ons as well as the obligatory requirements in 
Section VII of the bid documents such as the 12 mon ths warranty for servicing and repair in 
Kosovo and the five days turnaround time. In additi on, it offered the best value by including a 
training component in their offer.  
 
19. The evidence adduced by the investigation furth er confirms that the PDAs offered by 
Vendor 1 did not conform to the technical specifica tions of the ITB.  Although the complainant 
offered the largest number of PDAs within the state d ceiling price, the PDAs offered were not 
appropriate for the designated use as set forth in the bid documents.   
 
20. ID/OIOS determined that the procurement exercis e was conducted in accordance with the 
UN Financial Rules and Regulations governing procur ement and with UNMIK’s Finance 
Administrative Instruction 2/1999 on public procure ments using KCB funds. 
 
  `   5 IV.     RECOMMENDATION 
 
21. Based on the above, ID/OIOS makes the following  the recommendation:   
Recommendation 1 : It is recommended that UNMIK take note of ID/OIOS ’ findings and 
conclusions and advise DRA staff members, DRA emplo yee 2 and DRA logistics officer 1 of the 
result of this investigation.  (ID Rec. IV04/374/01 ) 
 
 