 
 
 
 
UNITED NATIONS                           NATIONS UN IES 
 
This report is protected under the provisions of 
paragraph 18 of ST/SGB/273 of 7 September 1994  
 
 
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL 
 
 
OFFICE OF INTERNAL OVERSIGHT SERVICES 
INVESTIGATIONS DIVISION  
 
REDACTED 
REPORT OF INVESTIGATION 
 
ID CASE NO. 0580/03 
 
 
 
 
23 May 2005 
 
 I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
1.  This report deals with a case of cheque fraud which  was investigated by the Investigations 
Division of the Office of Internal Oversight Servic es (ID/OIOS) between October 2003 and 
March 2005.  
 
2.  The United Nations Office in Nairobi (UNON) reported to  ID/OIOS that the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in Bratislava, S lovakia had made payments to an 
individual based on falsified documents for a total  of US$10,079. Although the investigation did 
not establish who perpetrated the fraud, it was abl e to establish how the fraud was committed. 
The investigation also examined certain aspects of the control systems found within the finance 
office, UNDP Bratislava, where the fraud occurred.  
 
3.  This report provides a description of the evidence collected by the ID/OIOS Investigators, 
the findings, and makes a number of recommendations  to assist management in preventing this 
type of fraud.  
 
II. ISSUES 
 
4.  Can the fraudulently induced payments be recouped? 
 
5.  Was this fraud facilitated by a United Nations staf f member and, if so, can that individual 
be identified? 
 
III.   APPLICABLE LAW  
 
6.  Staff Rule 101.2(g) Staff members shall not intenti onally alter, destroy, misplace or 
render useless any official document, record or fil e entrusted to them by virtue of their functions, 
which document, record or file is intended to be ke pt as part of the records of the Organization.   
 
7.  Staff Regulation 1.2 (b): Staff members shall uphol d the highest standards of efficiency, 
competence and integrity.  
 
8.  Staff Regulation 1.2 (g): Staff members shall not u se their office or knowledge gained 
from their official functions for private gain, fin ancial or otherwise, or for the private gain of any  
third party, including family, friends and those th at they favour.   
 
9.  Staff Regulation 1.2 (i) Staff members shall exerci se the utmost discretion with regard to 
all matters of official business. They shall not co mmunicate to any Government, entity, person or 
any other source any information known to them by r eason of their official position that they 
know or ought to have known has not been made publi c . . . 
 
10.  Fraud under Slovakian Criminal Code, 1961: Article 250, from Act 140 of the 1961 
Slovakian Criminal Code whereby - “any person who d oes harm to the property of others or 
enriches himself….... and causes harm or damage is guilty of fraud” IV. BACKGROUND 
 
11.  Per agreements between UNDP, UNHQ and UNON, UNDP country  offices provide a 
range of administrative services, including cash di sbursements, related to programme 
implementation for United Nations agencies.  The UNDP  country offices record the layout of 
funds on Inter Office Vouchers (IOV) and bill the v arious agencies for these services on a 
monthly basis by preparing a Report AT 036 for each  agency, which has appended to it copies of 
all IOVs for that agency for the month.  The origin al AT 036 report and its attachments are sent 
to UNDP HQ New York by diplomatic pouch and a copy is  sent to the agency. Report AT 036 is 
thereafter filed in the UNDP country finance files.  In UNDP Bratislava, copies are not kept of 
the attachments and the Report AT 036 does not enum erate them.  This office processes about 25 
cash disbursements a month. 
 
12.  In October 2003, UNON Finance was reconciling its acc ounts with UNDP Bratislava and 
noted there was an outstanding IOV from August 2002 .  UNON Finance could not locate the 
August 2002 Report AT 036 or its attachments.  It r equested these materials from UNDP 
Bratislava and determined that there were two cash disbursement vouchers which could not be 
reconciled:  two lump sum payments to The Consultan t, in the amounts of US$5,814 and 
US$4,265, for travel to Johannesburg and Monrovia t o attend Ozone Secretariat conferences in 
August 2002 and September 2002 respectively.   
 
13.  UNON finance determined that these two vouchers were based on a genuine travel 
request authorization which had been sent from UNON to the UNDP Bratislava office on 25 
June 2002.  The two travel requests of The Consulta nt changed certain details of the genuine fax, 
including the name of the payee, the date, comments  and the UNON fax number which is unique 
to each UNON fax and is assigned in the UNON cable room , but retained, amongst other items, 
the names and signatures of the authorizing officer s, and the Travel Request number, which is 
specific to each request. 
 
14.  UNON finance concluded that the faxes which instructe d UNDP Bratislava to make these 
payments were forged. Furthermore, UNEP confirmed th at there were no meetings in 
Johannesburg and Monrovia in 2002, that The Consult ant was not UNEP’s consultant, and that 
payment of lump sums to consultants for travel was irregular in any event.  
 
V. INVESTIGATIVE DETAILS 
15.  ID/OIOS learned that the genuine and the forged fax es were received by the registry clerk 
of the UNDP Bratislava registry office and, in the normal course of business, forwarded by email 
to The Finance Department Supervisor, and to Financ e Assistant 1.  The Finance Department 
Supervisor then forwarded the genuine fax to the tr avel department for processing, but neither 
The Finance Department Supervisor nor Finance Assis tant 1 forwarded the forged faxes 
elsewhere.   
16.  Finance Assistant 1 then emailed “The Consultant” o n both occasions to notify him of the 
authorization of payment and he and “The Consultant ” exchanged emails to arrange the time and 
means of his collection of the payment.  On both oc casions “The Consultant” presented himself 
at the UNDP office.  On one occasion, he logged in with his signature and identification number, but there was no sign-in record the other time.  “T he Consultant” met with someone from the 
finance department, probably Finance Assistant 1, a lthough Finance Assistant 1 has no 
recollection of meeting him. In keeping with accept ed practice within UNDP Bratislava and 
Slovakia as a whole, whoever met with “The Consulta nt” had him write his name and identity 
details on the back of the respective checks. Howev er, UNDP Bratislava does not keep an 
independent copy of such information.  “The Consult ant” also signed a cash disbursement form 
and subsequently cashed both checks. 
17.  ID/OIOS obtained copies of the checks from the bank  and acquired the identity details 
from the back of the check.  ID/OIOS consulted with  the Slovakian police and found that neither 
“The Consultant” nor his company were in their data bases and the police concluded that the 
identity materials provided by him when he picked u p the checks were likely to be false. 
ID/OIOS also found that the email account used by “ The Consultant” to arrange collection of the 
cheques at UNDP Bratislava had been discontinued. 
 
18.  ID/OIOS examined copies of the forged faxes which h ad been retained in the UNDP 
Bratislava registry database.  These copies had a h eader with UNON’s sender details, but unlike 
the UNDP Bratislava hard copies in the finance files  and those which had been forwarded to 
UNON in October 2003, the registry copies also had a  footer which reflected that they had 
actually been sent from a store which provides fax services in a shopping centre near the UNDP 
Bratislava office. 
 
19.  Finance Assistant 1 claimed he had not noticed the footer on them.  When ID/OIOS asked 
why the photocopies of the forged faxes in the UNDP finance file did not have the footer, he 
disclaimed responsibility for the photocopying.   
20.  At the time of these incidents, two photocopying as sistants had been working on an ad 
hoc basis at the finance office and had access to d epartmental files.  Photocopying Assistant 1 
was a relative of The Finance Department Supervisor , and Photocopying Assistant 2, was the 
daughter of Finance Assistant 2.  Photocopying Assi stant 2 assisted her father periodically 
without pay.  OIOS was informed that the two assist ants helped in the preparation of the end of 
month financial returns, which included retrieving documents from various files, copying them 
and returning them to the files.  Photocopying Assi stant 1 was working at the finance office at the 
relevant time period, but it has not been fully est ablished when Photocopying Assistant 2 worked 
at the office.  No timesheets were kept for either assistant. 
 
21.  Review of procedures at UNON, UNEP Narobi and UNDP Brati slava in connection with 
payments of this sort showed that  
• UNDP Bratislava relies on the authorizing signature s on the faxes and does not verify their 
authenticity with the agency; 
• UNDP Bratislava maintains a sign-in sheet which req uires a signature and identity 
information, but it was kept haphazardly at the tim e of these incidents; • UNDP Bratislava disperses cheques upon proof of ide ntity, which is recorded on the back of 
the cheque, and the payee signs the original cash d isbursement voucher upon receipt of the 
cheque, but the finance office does not retain a co py of the payee’s proof of identification; 
• UNDP Bratislava does not maintain a mail log; 
• While procedures for reconciling accounts between U NON and UNDP were in place, UNON 
did not attempt to reconcile the August 2002 UNDP Br atislava  account for more than a year 
after it was purportedly submitted; and 
• UNEP Narobi stated that it has had several problems with fraudulent payments by UNDP 
offices. 
VI. FINDINGS 
 
Issue One:  Can the fraudulently induced payments b e recovered from The Consultant? 
22.  ID/OIOS, with the assistance of the Slovakia police , has not been able to ascertain the 
identity of “The Consultant.”  However, “The Consul tant,” if identified and found, would be 
subject to prosecution under the Slovakian penal co de. 
 
Issue Two:  Was this fraud facilitated by a United Nations staff member and, if so, can that 
individual be identified? 
23.  ID/OIOS has established that the genuine UNON fax num ber was photocopied and 
altered to produce The Consultant’s fax requests.  It has also established that the forged faxes 
were transmitted locally, which suggests that this fraud was carried out in Slovakia. 
 
24.  Whoever forged the faxes had to have access to the genuine fax and knowledge of the 
format and function of the travel requests and the procedures used in processing these requests. 
 
25.  The fact that UNON finance did not receive the Repor t AT 036 and the appended IOV 
although the cover letter to UNON was filed at UNDP Br atislava, suggests that someone with 
knowledge and access manipulated the system to dela y discovery of the fraud.  Furthermore, the 
photocopies of the forged faxes which were filed wi th the Report AT 036 were copied without 
the identifying footer, which also suggests an inte nt to delay discovery of the fraud. 
 
26.  Consequently, it is highly probable that this fraud  was facilitated by a UNDP Bratislava 
staff member, probably in the finance department, b ut ID/OIOS Investigators were not able to 
determine who was responsible. 
 
27.  If a staff member is found to have facilitated this  fraud, he could be charged with 
violation of Staff Rule 101.2(g), Staff Regulation 1.2(b), (g) and (i), and would be subject to 
prosecution under the Slovakian penal code. 
 
VII. RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
28.  In the light of the preceding findings and con clusions, OIOS makes the following 
recommendations:  
Recommendation 1:  It is recommended that UNDP revis e the system in place for verification 
and payment of travel authorization requests to enh ance and safeguard procedures and prevent 
fraud. (Rec. No. IV/03/580/01) 
Recommendation 2:  It is recommended that UNDP Brati slava retain copies of identification 
provided by payees to assist in later identity chec k requirements. (Rec. No.  IV/03/580/02) 
Recommendation 3:  It is recommended that UNDP Brati slava avoid nepotism and maintain 
proper records time and pay records for part time e mployees. (Rec. No. IV/03/580/03) 
Recommendation 4:  It is recommended that all Agenc ies utilizing the services of UNDP use the 
Atlas electronic payment and financial accounts sys tem which checks the authenticity of an 
authorization and creates an electronic log of even ts.  (Rec. No. IV/03/580/04) 
Recommendation 5: It is recommended that the United  Nations establish a secure intranet 
website for travel claims which would permit author ization levels for receiving and making 
payments, and offer a built in electronic audit tra cking facility.  (Rec. No. IV/03/580/05) 
Recommendation 6:  It is recommended that UNDP reque st the Slovakian Police to investigate 
this matter. (Rec. No. IV/03/580/06) 
 
 
 
 