 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNITED NATIONS                                            NATIONS UNIES  
 
This report is protected under the provisions of 
ST/SGB/273, paragraph 18, of 7 September 1994"  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OFFICE OF INTERNAL OVERSIGHT SERVICES 
INVESTIGATIONS DIVISION 
 
 
 
 
REDACTED  
REPORT OF INVESTIGATION 
 
ID CASE NO. 0570/03 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 December 2004  
 
 STRICTLY  CONFIDENTIAL    
     
  
   2  
REPORT INTO SEEKING ASSISTANCE FROM PERSONS EXTERNAL  TO THE ORGANIZATION  
 
 
ID  CASE NO. 0570/03 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
___________________________________________________ _____________________ 
                       Page No. 
 
 
I.      INTRODUCTION    ………………………………………………   3  
 
 
II.     APPLICABLE LAW    ……………………………………………    3 
 
 
III.    METHODOLOGY    ……………………………………………………   3 
 
 
IV.     BACKGROUND INFORMATION    ………………………………              3 
 
 
V.      INVESTIGATIVE DETAILS    …………………………………  4 
 
 A. “Hiwot Abebe” email of 26 January 2003  …  4 
B.  Email submitted by the staff member to Ambassad or  
    Negroponte and US Government Officials    …  4 
 C. Interview of the staff member ……………………………   5 
D. Emails by the staff member to Mr. Mzumara, OIC, SRO, 
Lusaka   ………………………………………………    5  
 E. Interview with Mr. Dickson Mzumara   ….   6 
 F.  Allegations of Sexual Harassment     ……….   6   
 
 
VI.     EVIDENCE , FINDING OF FACTS    ………………………  8 
 
 
VII.     CONCLUSION   ……………………………………………………………  8 
 
 
VIII.    RECOMMENDATIONS   …………………………………………………   9 
 
 
 
   
     
  
   3  
I.   INTRODUCTION 
 
1.  The Investigations Division of the Office of Intern al 
Oversight Services (OIOS) received several emails s ent to 
persons external to the Organization, which alleged  that 
wrongdoings were committed at the Economic Commissi on for Africa 
(ECA) but no action was taken.  One of the authors of the said 
emails was a staff member of ECA. 
 
2.  Subsequently, an investigation was conducted that r evealed 
that contrary to UN Rules and Regulations, the staf f member sent 
emails to His Excellency, Ambassador John Negropont e of the US 
Mission to the UN, the President and Vice-President  of the 
United States of America, Senator John Kerry and Se nator Dodd of 
the United States Senate amongst others.  
 
 
II.   APPLICABLE LAW 
 
3.  Regulation 1.2 (i)  of the Staff Regulations provides that  
“Staff members shall exercise the utmost discretion  with regard 
to all matters of official business.  They shall no t communicate 
to any Government, entity, person or any other sour ce any 
information known to them by reason of their offici al position 
that they know or ought to have known has not been made public, 
except as appropriate in the normal course of their  duties or by 
authorization of the Secretary-General.  These obli gations do 
not cease upon separation from service”. 
 
 
III.   METHODOLOGY 
 
4.  OIOS investigation of this matter entailed obtainin g and 
analyzing relevant documents. Staff members were al so 
interviewed including the staff member. 
 
 
IV.   BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
 
5.  The staff member worked in ECA at the P5 level.  He  retired 
at the end of November 2003 having worked for the O rganization 
for over 25 years. 
 
 
 
   
     
  
   4 V.   INVESTIGATIVE DETAILS 
 
A.   “Hiwot Abebe” email of 26 January 2003 
 
6.  During the course of the investigation, it was reve aled 
that on 26 January 2003, an anonymous person, using  the 
identities of “Hiwot Abebe” sent an email to the Pr esident and 
Vice-President of the United States of America.  Th e email was 
also addressed to Senator John Kerry and Senator Do dd of the 
United States Senate.  The email had an attachment that was 
addressed to the Executive Secretary of ECA and hig hlighted 
allegations of sexual harassment and rape perpetrat ed by some 
senior officials of ECA within the ECA Complex.  Th e title to 
the attachment was “Crimes of Rape and Maladministr ation within 
the compound of ECA”.  The document was also copied  to the 
Secretary-General, Ethiopian Foreign Ministry and s enior 
officials in the UN System. 
 
7.  “Abebe’s” complaint to the American Government was that the 
Executive Secretary, ECA had failed to take action against staff 
members who were alleged to have sexually harassed and raped ten 
women staff members of ECA.  “Abebe” was therefore asking the 
American Government to intervene on behalf of the a ggrieved 
women. 
 
8.  The above email and the attachment were copied to t he staff 
member and other persons working in the Organizatio n. 
 
B.   Email submitted by the staff member to  
Ambassador Negroponte  
and US Government Officials 
 
9.  On 28 January 2003, the staff member wrote an email  to His 
Excellency, Ambassador John Negroponte of the US Mi ssion to the 
UN and “Hiwot”.  He also copied the email to the Pr esident and 
Vice - President of the United States of America, S enator John 
Kerry and Senator Dodd of the United States Senate.   In 
addition, he attached to the email the document all eging rape 
and sexual harassment by some officials of ECA - “C rimes of Rape 
and Maladministration within the compound of ECA”.  On the same 
day White House responded and thanked the staff mem ber for 
emailing President Bush and Vice - President Cheney . 
                 
10.  In his email to Ambassador Negroponte, the staff me mber 
informed him that the aggrieved staff members had e xhausted all 
avenues available for recourse under the UN justice  system.  The 
staff member therefore appealed to Ambassador Negro ponte to   
     
  
   5 intervene by drawing this to the attention of the S ecretary-
General.  
 
C.   Interview of the staff member 
 
11.  In his interview with the Investigators, the staff member 
initially denied sending the email and the attachme nt in 
question to Ambassador Negroponte and other persons  outside the 
UN System.  Later he conceded that he wrote to the Ambassador in 
his capacity as a staff representative after the ag grieved staff 
members approached him for assistance. 
 
12.  The staff member stated that there were ten women s taff 
members who were victims of sexual harassment at EC A.  When the 
Investigators requested the staff member to provide  the names of 
the ten women staff members, he refused to do so .   He stated that 
he was actually told about the allegations by a Sta ff Union 
member who confided to him that the allegations wer e true.  The 
staff member refused to disclose the name of the st aff member to 
the Investigators. 
 
13.  When the staff member was asked why he sought assis tance 
from Ambassador Negroponte, a non-UN staff member, his response 
was that the aggrieved staff members who were worki ng as a group 
felt that the issue was taking a long time to resol ve; 
therefore, he decided to appeal to Ambassador Negro ponte.  He 
said that he did not consult ECA management before writing to 
persons outside the Organization as the ECA interna l justice 
system seemed to have collapsed.  He said that his conscience 
was clear that sexual harassment did happen and tha t was why he 
had intervened on behalf of the female staff member s. 
 
14.  The staff member stated that the sexual harassment issue 
was raised and addressed at several staff and manag ement 
meetings by the Executive Secretary.  In this conne ction, on 18 
March 2003, the Executive Secretary wrote a memoran dum to the 
Officer-in-Charge, OHRM responding to all the alleg ations 
leveled against the management of ECA.  On the alle gation of 
sexual harassment, the Executive Secretary conclude d by stating 
that it was “totally unfounded and simply ridiculou s and 
preposterous”.    
                
D.   Emails by the staff member to Mr. Mzumara, OIC , SRO, Lusaka  
 
15.  On 29 January 2003, the staff member wrote an email  to Mr. 
Dickson Mzumara, Officer-in-Charge of the ECA Sub R egional 
Office in Lusaka, Zambia confirming that he had wri tten to 
Ambassador Negroponte because he had had a chat wit h friends who   
     
  
   6 thought that “this was too much of a hot potato”.  Mr. Mzumara 
was also a recipient of a copy of the email that wa s addressed 
to Ambassador Negroponte by the staff member. 
 
16.  On the same day, Mr. Mzumara replied through an ema il to 
the staff member and concurred with his action of w riting to the 
Ambassador.  However, Mr. Mzumara pointed out to th e staff 
member that he was concerned that he, the staff mem ber, was 
writing to persons outside the Organization.  Mr. M zumara stated 
that “Yes I thought as much.  My concern was you we re going out 
of the system and this is not in line with the Cond itions of 
Service.  See what comes out of it”.  The staff mem ber responded 
via email dated 29 January 2003 and stated that, “T hanks that I 
have been told.  This question was brought in the J AB in 
Nairobi.  With a few phone calls, the case was shel ved.  The 
lady who broadcasted the message is the one who wro te to White 
House and the Vice Presidents of the USA.  If the i nternal 
justice system had functioned every thing would hav e been kept 
within the system.  My hope was Negroponte being in  the UN 
Secretariat would do damage control and get somehow  the Boss to 
address the problem, in the best interest of the Se cretary 
General.  The ladies will continue writing to Human  Rights 
Organizations, especially those that are fired.  It  may not 
produce immediate results but a lot of damage will be done”.  He 
added that he wrote to the Ambassador “to show the man that 
dialogue is the best option in life”. 
 
E.   Interview with Mr. Dickson Mzumara  
 
17.  Mr. Mzumara recalled that in January 2003, the conc erned 
staff member who retired in November 2003 wrote to US Ambassador 
Negroponte concerning grievances of sexual harassme nt at ECA.  
He said that after he received a copy of that commu nication 
through email, he wrote to the staff member and adv ised him that 
it was contrary to UN Regulations for him to commun icate with 
persons external to the Organization.  In connectio n with this 
communication, Mr. Mzumara advised the staff member  to tender a 
letter of resignation. 
 
F.   Allegations of Sexual Harrassment 
 
18.  The allegation of sexual harassment made by one of the 
female staff members named in the anonymous letters  was 
investigated by OIOS/ID.  She had complained that h er contract 
was terminated after she had turned down the sexual  advances of 
a manager. 
   
     
  
   7 19.  The female staff member informed OIOS that during a n office 
retreat held at the Nazareth Restaurant in 2001, th e manager was 
at the coffee shop with two other staff members, Mr . Oluwatete 
Olokodana, Deputy Chief of Security and Mr. Vintzis lav Stokykov, 
Chief, Facilities Management Section, when the mana ger 
approached her saying, “why are you wearing this, i t’s too hot 
here”. Whilst saying this he put his hand on her T- shirt and 
tried to look and touch her breast.  
 
20.  When interviewed, Mr. Olokodana said that he did no t 
witness any sexual harassment at the retreat. Howev er, in the 
presence of Mr. Stoykov, he recalled that the femal e staff 
member complained to the manager that she was not f eeling well 
whilst they were having lunch.  
 
21.  OIOS interviewed Mr. Stoykov who said that such an incident 
did not occur. However, he recalled the female staf f member 
being in the company of the manager, Mr. Olokodana and himself 
when she came to complain that she had flu whilst t hey were 
having coffee. 
 
22.  The manager told OIOS that he did not sexually hara ss the 
female staff member and that such allegations are m ade when 
staff members are dissatisfied with certain manager ial 
decisions.  He said that the female staff member’s contract was 
terminated because her performance was poor. 
 
23.  When the female staff member was re-interviewed by ID/OIOS, 
she maintained that she had been sexually harassed.  When asked 
why she had not engaged the various possible intern al systems, 
including OHRMS to have the issue resolved, she sta ted that she 
had not pursued the issue because she did not know how to 
approach it. The female staff member explained that  she thinks 
that her contract was not renewed because of the se xual 
harassment. The female staff member left the employ ment of ECA 
some two years ago and has never taken any steps to  engage any 
United Nations system options to pursue her complai nt. 
 
24.  In light of the above, there is therefore insuffici ent 
evidence to support the female staff member’s alleg ation of 
sexual harassment.  Both Mr. Olokodana and Mr. Stoy kov whom she 
claimed witnessed the incident deny that any incide nt occurred 
and reported a substantially different exchange. 
 
25.  Ms. Bongoy – Mawalla, Chief General Services Sectio n 
explained to OIOS that she was the focal point for women until 
July 2003.  She said that during her tenure, she is sued a   
     
  
   8 circular to create awareness about sexual harassmen t but no 
incident was reported by staff members. 
 
26.  During interviews with OIOS, Mr. Ali Todaro, Specia l 
Assistant to the Executive Secretary also denied se xually 
harassing women staff members at ECA as alleged in the anonymous 
emails.  Because those women were not named and the  staff member 
refused to identify them to ID/OIOS, it was not pos sible to 
further pursue the allegations. 
 
 
VI.  EVIDENCE, FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
27.  As indicated above, Staff Regulation 1.2 (i) stipul ates 
that staff members shall not communicate to any Gov ernment, 
entity, person or any other source any official inf ormation that 
they know has not been made public except as approp riate in the 
normal course of their duties or by authorization b y the 
Secretary General.  These obligations do not cease upon 
separation from service. 
 
28.  Email messages sent to US Ambassador Negroponte, Pr esident 
Bush, Vice President Cheney, Senators and other per sons external 
to the Organization by The staff member is a contra vention of 
the above Staff Regulation.  The reason for so doin g – 
especially in light of his refusal to identify the sources of 
the complaints he was ostensibly raising to the OIO S 
Investigators when asked – appears evident in The s taff member’s 
reply to Mr. Mzumara who told him his actions contr avened Staff 
Regulations.  The staff member had at the time indi cated that,  
“ ----- if the internal justice system had function ed every 
thing would have been kept within the system.  My h ope was 
Negroponte being in the UN Secretariat would do dam age control 
and get somehow the Boss to address the problem, in  the best 
interest of the Secretary General.  The ladies will  continue 
writing to Human Rights Organizations, especially t hose that are 
fired.  It may not produce immediate results but a lot of damage 
will be done”.                             
 
29.  During interviews with the OIOS Investigators, by h is own 
admission, the staff member confirmed communicating  to persons 
outside the Organization.  He did not inform ECA ma nagement 
arguing that the ECA internal justice system had co llapsed.  
However, he knew that the matter was being dealt wi th by the 
Executive Secretary as confirmed by him during his interview 
with the Investigators. 
 
   
     
  
   9  
 
VII.   CONCLUSION 
 
30.  In light of the above findings, it is evident that the 
staff member contravened Staff Regulation 1.2 (i).  He sought 
intervention from US Ambassador Negroponte and othe r persons who 
were external to the Organization.  Further, the st aff member 
disseminated emails that he knew were not to be mad e public 
without authorization from the Secretary-General. 
 
 
VIII.   RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
Recommendation 1  
 
It is recommended that this investigation report be  placed in 
the staff member’s Personnel Status File; (ID Rec. No. 
IV03/570/01) 
 
Recommendation 2  
 
It is recommended that Office of Legal Affairs (OLA ) send to the 
staff member a cease and desist letter pointing out  that though 
separated from the Organization he has an obligatio n not to 
disseminate official UN information as provided for  in 
Regulation 1.2(i) of the Staff Regulations “Staff m embers shall 
exercise the utmost discretion with regard to all m atters of 
official business.  They shall not communicate to a ny 
Government, entity, person or any other source any information 
known to them by reason of their official position that they 
know or ought to have known has not been made publi c, except as 
appropriate in the normal course of their duties or  by 
authorization of the Secretary-General.  These obli gations do 
not cease upon separation from service”.  
ID Rec. No. IV03/570/02) 
 
 
 
----- 
 