 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNITED NATIONS                                           NATIONS UNIES 
 
This report is protected under the provisions of 
ST/SGB/273, paragraph 18, of 7 September 1994" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OFFICE OF INTERNAL OVERSIGHT SERVICES 
INVESTIGATIONS DIVISION 
 
 
 
REDACTED 
 
REPORT OF INVESTIGATION  
 
ID CASE NO. 0202/01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 April 2005 
 
 
 STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL   2 REPORT INTO THE ALLEGATION THAT AN ECONOMIC COMMISSION OF AFRICA (ECA)  
STAFF MEMBER MISAPPROPRIATED MONEY INTENDED AS DAILY SUBSISTENCE 
ALLOWANCE (DSA)  FOR SOME PARTICIPANTS ATTENDING A CONFERENCE IN 
SEYCHELLES . 
 
 
ID  CASE NO. 0202/01 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
___________________________________________________ _____________________ 
 Page No. 
 
I.   INTRODUCTION   ………………………………………………….  3 
 
II.    APPLICABLE LAW    .………………………………………………   3 
 
III.    METHODOLOGY   ………………………………………………….  4 
 
IV.    BACKGROUND INFORMATION   ……………………………………   4 
 
V.    INVESTIGATIVE DETAILS   …………………………………………   4 
 
VI.    FINDINGS  OF FACT   ..….…………………………………………..  9 
 
VII.    CONCLUSIONS   …………………………………………………….  10 
 
VIII.    RECOMMENDATIONS   ..…………………………………………….  11 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  3 I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
1. The Investigations Division, Office of Internal Ove rsight Services (ID/OIOS) 
received a complaint that an Economic Commission of  Africa (ECA) staff member 
misappropriated the sum of US$12,000 that was inten ded as Daily Subsistence 
Allowance (DSA) for five participants attending a c onference in Seychelles. This 
complaint, received in 2001 some two years after th e alleged commission of the 
misappropriation, did not provide the name of the c onference, when it was held, or the 
name of the subject. In the course of its prelimina ry investigation, soon after receipt of 
this matter, ID/OIOS learned that the complainant n o longer worked at ECA and was 
inaccessible through other contact numbers given to  ID/OIOS. In spite of these 
difficulties however, ID/OIOS subsequently investig ated this case during one of its ECA 
missions when it found time to do so for the purpos e of ascertaining whether the theft 
could be corroborated and if so, identifying the pe rpetrator and any system weaknesses.  
 
 
II.  APPLICABLE  LAWS 
 
2. Staff Regulation 1.2 (g)  
 
Staff members shall not use their office or knowled ge gained from their official functions 
for private gain, financial or otherwise, or for th e private gain of any third party, 
including family, friends and those they favour.  No r shall staff members use their office 
for personal reasons to prejudice the positions of those they do not favour.  
 
3. Financial Rule 104.9 (ST/SGB/2003/7)  
 
Officials to whom cash advances are issued shall be  held personally accountable and 
financially liable for the proper management and sa fekeeping of cash so advanced and 
must be in a position to account for these advances  at all times. They shall submit 
monthly accounts unless otherwise directed by the U nder-Secretary-General for 
Management. 
 
4. Financial Rule 104.10 (ST/SGB/2003/7)  
 
(b) Disbursements shall be recorded in the accounts  as at the date on which they 
are made, that is, when the cheque is issued, trans fer is effected or cash is paid out. 
 
(c) Except where a paid cheque is returned by the b ank or a debit advice is 
received from the bank, a payee’s written receipt s hall be obtained for all 
disbursements. 
 
 
 
 
  4  
III.  METHODOLOGY 
 
5. ID/OIOS interviewed the ACGD Officer, ECA’s Officia l 1, and other staff 
members. Investigators also obtained and analyzed d ocuments including personnel 
records, bank records and the list of participants for the Seychelles conference 
indicating who was paid DSA. 
 
 
IV. BACKGROUND  INFORMATION  
 
6. ID/OIOS determined that the conference in question was “An Eastern and 
Southern Africa Sub Regional Meeting” and was held from 15 to 18 February, 1999 at 
the Berjaja Mahe Beach Resort Hotel in Victoria, Se ychelles. It was organized by the 
African Centre for Women (ACW), now the African Cen tre for Gender Development 
(ACGD).  
 
7. This conference attracted over 100 participants,  46 of whom were sponsored by 
ECA. The rest were sponsored by other international  organizations. 
 
8. When ECA finances a conference, a list of participa nts is prepared and then a 
travel request (a “PT.8”) is prepared for each part icipant. The PT.8 is certified by the 
Director of the Division and sent to the Finance Di vision, which verifies that the correct 
account number is quoted and that there is sufficie nt money to honor the request. It is 
then recorded in the Integrated Management Informat ion System (IMIS), which 
demonstrates approval of the request.  A letter to UNDP referencing the PT.8 number and 
account number is prepared and the Finance Division  approves that letter before it is sent 
to UNDP for payment to be made to the attendee.  
 
9. Typically when ECA sponsors a conference, it arrang es with the UNDP office in 
the country in which the conference is held to pay DSA to participants. However, there 
was no UNDP office in the Seychelles. Consequently the airfares and 50 per cent of DSA 
were paid to participants by UNDP offices in each p articipant’s country and the ACGD 
Officer was entrusted with the payment of the remai ning 50 per cent of DSA to 
participants while they were at the conference.  Wh en UNDP makes its payments, it 
sends an inter-office voucher (IOV) to ECA indicati ng the amount of money they have 
spent and ECA reimburses UNDP. If the DSA was not pa id and ticket not issued by 
UNDP, then an IOV credit is sent to the Finance Div ision. Cancellation of a PT.8 
indicates that that person did not attend the confe rence, and the UNDP office in question 
would then issue an IOV credit to ECA.   
 
 
V. INVESTIGATIVE  DETAILS 
 
10. In an inter-office memorandum dated 19 January 2000 , Official 3 asked the 
ACGD Officer to settle relevant claims and to provi de supporting documentation for the  5 US$49,000 the ACGD Officer had received for payment  of DSA and other miscellaneous 
expenses at the conference.  In a subsequent inter- office memorandum dated 17 February 
2000, Official 4 specifically questioned the paymen t of DSA to five people who had 
apparently not attended the 1999 Seychelles confere nce.   
 
11. ID/OIOS Investigators observed that of the five PT. 8 reference numbers referred 
to by Official 4 in his memorandum of 17 February 2 000, one was repeated and another 
PT.8 had in fact not been cancelled, leaving three rather than five apparently 
inappropriately disbursed DSA payments in the amoun t of US$3,011. The attendance list 
showed that the PT.8’s in question were for Partici pant 1, Participant 2 and Participant 3. 
 
12. ID/OIOS obtained the following documentation for th e money disbursed to the 
ACGD Officer for the payment of DSA.  
 
(a) Official 5 authorized Official 6 to pay the ACGD Of ficer the sum of 
US$40,000: US$35,000 for the remaining half of the DSA to be paid to the conference 
participants and US$5,000 for miscellaneous expense s. 
 
(b) Official 5 authorized the payment of a further sum of US$9,000 to the 
ACGD Officer for DSA to be paid to the conference p articipants. 
 
13. Receipt of payment of US$49,000 was confirmed as fo llows: 
 
(a) Advice notes from Barclays Bank PLC Independenc e Square (“Barclays”) 
confirm that US$49,300 was paid to the ACGD Officer . Barclays overpaid the ACGD 
Officer US$300 and debited this amount from UNDP’s a ccount. 
 
(b) A letter dated 8 March 2000 from Official 7 of UNDP office in Mauritius, 
confirmed that the ACGD Officer received US$49,000:  US$44,000 of which was to pay 
50 per cent DSA to participants.  
 
14.      In an inter-office memorandum dated 18 Februar y 2000, both Official 2 and the 
ACGD Officer responded to Official 4’s 17 February 2000 inquiry of payment of DSA to 
persons whose PT.8’s were cancelled and had not att ended the conference. Official 2 
stated that the funds transferred to Seychelles by ECA were managed by herself, the 
ACGD Officer and the UNDP Officer in Port Louis, Sey chelles. She further stated that 
the amount transferred to pay the remaining 50 per cent of DSA was only made available 
after the end of the conference, which created chao s in paying participants before their 
departures. In addition, Barclays did not have suff icient smaller US denominations and 
proposed the use of French francs. Consequently it was agreed that the ACGD Officer 
would give Barclays the list of participants and th e bank itself would make the remaining 
DSA payments.  
 
 
15.     That memorandum also stated that: 
  6 (a)  The ACGD Officer had received US$5,000 and US$ 3,500 to cover 
miscellaneous expenses. He also received US$22,000 in notes late 18 February 1999, 
US$3,327 in notes and US$3,300 in travellers’ chequ es early on 19 February 1999 to 
facilitate the payment of DSA;  
 
(b) Payment of DSA was handled directly by Barclays ’ representative in the 
presence of UNDP Liaison Officer Lucas and the ACGD Officer; and 
 
(c) The bank tellers directly paid participants US$ 12,173. The ACGD Officer 
stated, “The DSA payment included under the bank sl ip in the amount of US$10,120.00 
and US$2,053.00 which was made on 19 February 1999 was handled at the bank 
counter…” 
 
16.        According to Barclays’ letter dated 27 June 2000 and Official 4’s memorandum 
of March 3, 2000, the ACGD Officer received the sum s of US$22,000 and US$3,327 in 
notes and US$3,300 in travellers’ cheques for the p ayment of participants.  The bank paid 
participants DSA in the sums of US$10,120 and US$2, 053. 
 
17.       When interviewed the ACGD Officer told ID/OIO S that Official 2 had asked him 
to pay miscellaneous expenses and DSA to the partic ipants of the Seychelles conference.  
He said that ECA had written to UNDP Mauritius, who asked UNDP HQ for authority to 
transfer funds to Barclays in Seychelles. The ACGD Officer then cashed the funds and 
disbursed DSA to participants.  
 
18.       He said that on 17 February 1999 he paid the first group of participants at the 
hotel in the presence of the UNDP Officer.  He indi cated his payment to participants on 
the list by placing asterisks against their names. On 18 February 1999 Barclays paid the 
other participants using the attendance list suppli ed by the ACGD Officer.  Upon receipt 
of identification from the payees, the bank tellers  had the participant sign his/her name on 
the attendance list and paid the DSA. The ACGD Offi cer said that he was present when 
the bank tellers paid the remaining participants an d that after the payments were made, 
the attendance list was returned to him.  
 
19.       The ACGD Officer confirmed that it was his re sponsibility to ensure that 
participants received their DSA and signed their na mes against the attendance list upon 
receipt of their DSA. Lack of a signature against a  name meant that that person did not 
attend the conference. 
 
20.       The ACGD Officer provided ID/OIOS with the at tendance list during the course 
of his interview. Of the three queried payments, th ere was an asterisk only against 
Participant 1’s name on the attendance list. 
 
 
21.       He said that for persons who did not attend t he conference, instructions had to be 
given for their PT.8’s to be cancelled. There were no cancellations before the conference 
but they were four to five after the conference.   7  
22.       ID/OIOS Investigators observed that the PT.8’ s for Participant 1, Participant 2 
and Participant 3 were all cancelled after the conf erence by Official 2.    
 
23.       The ACGD Officer explained the cancellation o f PT.8’s after the conference by 
saying that some governments substituted participan ts a few days before the conference. 
As a result of such late cancellations and/or subst itutions it is only after the conference 
that instructions are given to cancel and amend the  relevant PT.8 forms accordingly. 
 
24.       ID/OIOS showed the ACGD Officer three cancell ed PT.8’s. 
 
(a) The ACGD Officer examined the cancelled PT.8 fo r Participant 1, and 
said that she had not attended the conference. But when shown a signature and asterisk 
against her name on the attendance list, indicating  payment of US$1,000 in DSA, he said 
that he could not confirm whether he had given inst ructions to cancel the PT.8 and that it 
was possible that it had been done by the Director.   
 
(b) The ACGD Officer was shown a cancelled PT.8 for  Participant 2. Upon 
seeing a signature against this name (but no asteri sk) as having received US$1,068 in 
DSA, he told ID/OIOS that the secretaries could hav e gotten the wrong information or 
the Director may have given the wrong instructions for the travel to be cancelled.   
 
(c) The ACGD Officer was shown a cancelled PT.8 for  Participant 3.  Upon 
seeing a signature against this name (but no asteri sk) as having received US$943 in DSA, 
he said that it was a mistake similar to that of th e case of Participant 2.   
 
(d) In all of these cases the PT.8’s were cancelled  by Official 2 on 19 March 
1999, after the conference.   
 
25.       The ACGD Officer explained these discrepancie s by suggesting that a bank 
employee might have tampered with the DSA list and forged signatures of participants 
who did not attend and then pocketed their DSA. He said that he dealt with the manager; 
a teller and a go-between person and that any one o f them could have falsely signed the 
DSA list. However, he had previously acknowledged t hat he had witnessed the payments 
being made by the Bank staff and he had not raised any questions or concerns then or at 
any time before being questioned by ID/OIOS Investi gators on this point.  However, he 
claimed to be surprised by the discrepancies pointe d out by ID/OIOS.  He then 
acknowledged that he had received memoranda from Of ficial 4 asking him to account, 
amongst other things, for the moneys that he had be en given for DSA, but he thought that 
the matter had been settled despite the unaccounted  discrepancies. 
 
26.     ID/OIOS, in a telephone interview with Particip ant 3, asked if she had attended the 
Seychelles conference and she stated that she had n ot. She added that she had not been 
invited to attend and had not received any DSA for this conference. 
  8 27.     In a second interview with the ACGD Officer by phone, he was told that 
Participant 3 confirmed that she had not attended t he conference. He again said that he 
had not paid all the participants, Barclays had pai d some, and that the situation during 
payment was chaotic. He said it was difficult to re member whom he paid and there could 
have been errors. 
 
28.       ID/OIOS attempted to interview Participant 1 and Participant 2 but was unable to 
locate them at the contact numbers provided. ID/OIO S also attempted to locate the 
UNDP Officer, but the UNDP Liaison office had been c losed in 1999 and attempts to 
locate her through other UNDP contacts proved futile .  The ACGD Officer was unable to 
provide ID/OIOS with the names of bank personnel wh o were involved with the DSA 
payments. 
 
29.       ID/OIOS interviewed a staff member, who said that each person attending the 
conference was required to register and that a list  of these attendees were then compiled 
and included in a Report that was prepared on the C onference.  She told ID/OIOS that 
this list is usually accurate but could at times co ntain errors, for instance if the list was 
prepared before the conference rather than from the  Register, it might not be accurate. 
ID/OIOS reviewed the list included in the Report an d noted that the names of Participant 
1, Participant 2 and Participant 3 were not include d.  
 
30.      When ID/OIOS first asked the ACGD Officer on A pril 28, 2003 how much money 
he had received for the payment of DSA, he said tha t he had only received US$5,000 for 
miscellaneous expenses. However when ID Investigato rs showed the ACGD Officer 
Barclays’ documents with his signature, indicating that he had received US$22,000, he 
admitted that it was his signature and that he had in fact received US$22,000 from the 
bank for payment of DSA. Although the bank records show that the ACGD Officer had 
also received US$3,327 in cash for DSA payment and US$3,300 in travellers’ cheques - a 
total of US$28,627, the ACGD Officer said that he c ould not remember having received 
these sums of money. He also confirmed that he had signed for the receipt of the funds 
Barclays paid out.  ID reminded the ACGD Officer of the contents of his  memorandum of 
18 February 2000 where he acknowledged receipt of a dditional sums and he admitted the 
contents of that memorandum . 
 
31.       The ACGD Officer said that in June 1999 he pr epared a report and submitted a 
certificate of expenses to Officer 8 of the Disburs ement Unit.  The report was reviewed 
by Official 2, who signed the memorandum forwarding  the report.   
 
32.       Official 2 was not present at the time of ID/ OIOS’s mission to ECA. 
Consequently, ID/OIOS forwarded certain questions i n relation to the Seychelles 
conference and she furnished answers. 
 
33.       ID/OIOS asked Official 2 if she was satisfied  that the ACGD Officer gave a 
proper explanation for the apparent discrepancies a nd whether there was a final report. 
She responded by saying that the ACGD Officer had p rovided a comprehensive 
explanation of the apparent discrepancies to Offici al 4.  She placed the blame for  9 improper payment of DSA on Barclays since the bank staff made the payments, but does 
not take into account the ACGD Officer’s acknowledg ement of witnessing these same 
payments or his responsibility for the safeguarding  of the funds entrusted to him.  She 
also said that following the ACGD Officer’s corresp ondence of 24 March 2000, a 
meeting was called by Official 5 to discuss the iss ue with the ACGD Officer and Official 
3. Subsequently, instruction was given by the Direc tor of PPFD to close the account with 
the submitted supporting documents.  
 
34.       ID/OIOS reviewed the ACGD Officer’s memorandu m dated 24 March 2000. In 
that memorandum the ACGD Officer confirmed that DSA  was paid to the bearers of the 
five PT.8 numbers to which Official 4 referred. He agreed that payment of DSA to non-
attendees was a serious matter, but, as had Officia l 2, placed the blame on Barclays, 
claiming that the bank had paid the DSAs.  
  
35.       ID/OIOS observed that Official 2 and the ACGD  Officer stated in their joint 
memorandum of 18 February 2000 that the ACGD Office r had paid some participants 
DSA and Barclays paid the rest.  However, both Offi cial 2 and the ACGD Officer when 
interviewed, and the ACGD Officer in his memorandum  of 24 March 2000, claimed 
Barclays had paid all the DSA.  
  
36.       In memorandum dated 13 April 2000 from Offici al 3 to Official 4, Official 3 
recommended that an independent investigation be co nducted into the matter because 
despite requests for more documentation and explana tions, the ACGD Officer did not 
properly account for the expenses of the meeting.    
 
 
VI. FINDINGS  OF  FACT 
 
Issue 1:  Did the ACGD Officer inappropriately use his office for financial gain?  
 
37.     The ACGD Officer confirmed at his interview s that he was entrusted with payment 
of miscellaneous expenses and DSA to participants a t the Seychelles conference.  In his 
interoffice memorandum of 18 February 2004, [see pa ragraphs 14 and 15], he admitted 
that he had collected US$28,627 for these payments.   Although the allegation was that 
US$12,000 had been misappropriated, ID/OIOS found t hat only US$3,011 was 
unaccounted for [see paragraph 11].  The attendance  list used for payment of DSA had no 
asterisk against the name of Participant 3 and Part icipant 2 (indicating that the Barclays 
had “paid” them), but there was an asterisk against  the name of Participant 1 - a system 
devised by the ACGD Officer which was used by him t o indicate that he had made a 
specific payment, in this instance indicating that the ACGD Officer had “paid” her [see 
paragraph 18].    
 
38.      The ACGD Officer’s theory that the Barclay  Bank staff were responsible does not 
withstand scrutiny. First, he acknowledges that he witnessed the payments made by the 
Bank; second, while the Bank may have performed thi s service for him, he retained 
responsibility for the accounting for the funds giv en to him; third, nowhere else had The  10  ACGD Officer claimed that the bank staff took the f unds until he was questioned by 
Investigators including at the time the disbursemen ts were made and later when 
questioned about the discrepancies by ECA managers.  
 
Issue 2:  Did The ACGD Officer appropriately safegu ard the cash advances for the 
conference and  did he properly account for these advances as requ ired by Financial Rule 
104.9?  
 
39.      Official 3 asked the ACGD Officer for an a ccounting of US$49,000 he had 
received for payment of DSA and other expenses at t he conference in his inter-office 
memorandum of 19 January 2000 [see paragraph 10].  In his inter-office memorandum of 
18 February 2004, the ACGD Officer admitted collect ing US$38,627 for payment of 
DSA to participants at the conference [see paragrap h 15.a].  However, in his interview of 
April 28, 2003, he first claimed that he had only r eceived US$5,000 (for miscellaneous 
expenses), but then admitted he had received US$22, 000 [see paragraph 30].  The ACGD 
Officer blamed the chaotic atmosphere during paymen t of DSA for any discrepancies.  
However, it is apparent that he did not safeguard a nd protect the cash advances for the 
conference as required by Financial Rule 104.9, nor  did he provide a proper accounting 
of these funds. 
 
Issue 3:  Did the ACGD Officer keep proper records of payment of DSA and other 
conference expenses as required by Financial Rule 1 04.10 (b) and (c)?  
 
40.      By the ACGD Officer’s admission in paragra ph 27, payments of DSA at the 
conference were chaotic and there could have been e rrors for which he bears full 
responsibility as the person assigned to make the d isbursement of these United Nations 
funds.  In addition, receipt of funds was indicated  only by signature next to a name on the 
attendance list.  This is not proper recording of d isbursements as required by Financial 
Rule 104.10 (b) and (c).  
 
 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
 
41. The signatures for three people on the attendan ce list, who did not attend the 
conference, were forged and the disbursements to th em unaccounted for, resulting in a 
loss of US$3,011 to ECA. There are only two possibi lities:  first, that the ACGD Officer 
forged the signatures and retained the money and se cond, that a bank employee forged 
the signatures and kept the money despite the ACGD Officer’s presence during the 
disbursement process and he failed to notice or to raise the issue. Either way, the ACGD 
Officer is responsible for the loss of funds.    
 
42. It is of additional concern that despite questi ons raised regarding the loss of the 
funds and the failure to safeguard the money on the  part of the ACGD Officer, ECA 
managers did not take measures to hold him accounta ble or to determine whether the 
manner of handling the funds in this case might war rant further scrutiny for the purpose 
of avoiding similar problems in future.   11   
 
VIII. RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Recommendation 1  
 
It is recommended that appropriate action be taken against the ACGD Officer, including 
for being in breach of Financial Rule 104.9 and 104 .10 (b) and (c).  (ID Rec. No. 
IV01/202/01) 
 
Recommendation 2  
 
It is recommended that ECA management review its ca sh disbursement practices for 
additional gaps and examine this case for lessons l earned to avoid similar problems in 
future. (ID Rec. No. IV01/202/02) 
 
 
----- 
 
 
 