United Nations Nations Unies 
INTEROFFICE MEMORANDUM MEMORANDUM INTERIEUR 
TO: Mr. Klaus Toepfer, Executive Director DATE: 22 April 2005 
A: United Nations Environment Programme REFERENCE: OUSG 05-226 
THROUGH: 
SIC DE: 
FROM: Barbara Dixon, Officer-in-Charge 
DE: Office of Internal Oversight Services 
SUBJECT Allegations of misconduct occurring in the Post-Conflict Assessment Unit 
(PCAU) of the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) - 
ID Case No. 0374103 
OBJET: 
1. The Investigations Division of the Office of Internal Oversight Services 
(ID/OIOS) received a report of alleged wrongdoing in the Balkans Task Force (BTF) and 
in the Post-Conflict Assessment Unit (PCAU) of the United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP). The complaints are against two UNEP Staff Members, and a 
UNEPIPCAU Consultant, all of whom are from the same country and had previously 
worked together. 
(i) 
UNEP Staff Member 2, and UNEP/PCAU Consultant maintained an ongoing 
relationship with their former company, thereby creating a conflict of interest. Allegation 1. While working for the BTF and PCAU, UNEP Staff Member 1, 
(ii) Allegation 2. UNEP Staff Member 1 demanded a kickback of fifty percent 
of consultancy fees paid to experts and these fees were shared with UNEP Staff 
Member 2 and UNEP/PCAU Consultant. 
(iii) Allegation 3. UNEP Staff Member 1 and UNEP Staff Member 2 received 
high-level contracts without meeting the proper educational and professional 
qualifications. 
(iv) Allegation 4. UNEP Staff Member 1 and UNEPIPCAU Consultant 
represented UNEP in various seminars and supervised UNEP staff members, 
contrary to relevant United Nations rules. 
2. 
UNEP/PCAU Consultant did not at any time have a financial relationship with the former 
company. However, the BTF had a series of contracts and extensions of those contracts 
with the former company and UNEP Staff Member 1 was a shareholder and senior officer The evidence adduced for allegation 1 shows that UNEP Staff Member 2, and of the former company and, as a sub-contractor of the former company, worked for the 
BTF. During the time UNEP Staff Member 1 held a consultancy contract with UNEP, the 
former company had no contractual relationship with UNEP. Although this created the 
appearance of a conflict of interest, none was established. 
3. 
UNEP Staff Member 1. The evidence adduced for Allegation 2 does not support the complaint against 
4. The evidence adduced for allegation 3 shows that UNEP Staff Member 2 
received an appointment with PCAU in May 2000, about a year after s/he began work for 
the BTF as a consultant. Both s/he and UNEP Staff Member 1 subsequently received 
high-level contracts. UNEP management advised ID/OIOS that UNEP Staff Member 1 
and UNEP Staff Member 2 performed well, which they felt justified their decision to 
grant them contracts at the high level, although UNEP Staff Member 1 did not have the 
requisite educational background and UNEP Staff Member 2 had little environmental 
expertise prior to his consultancy with BTF. This allegation could not be substantiated. 
5. Allegation 4 was substantiated. UNEP/PCAU Consultant and UNEP Staff 
Member 1 both admitted that they had represented the Organization in various seminars 
while consulting for BTF. UNEP Staff Member 1 also supervised UNEP staff members 
while a consultant. These actions were a breach of ST/Al/l999/7 II 2 (f), which states 
"consultants shall not perform functions of staff members of the Organization or have 
any representative or supervisory responsibility." UNEPlPCAU Consultant continues as a 
consultant, but UNEP Staff Member 1 is now a staff member. 
6. 
company received contracts and extensions of contracts with BTF through UNOPS 
without competitive bidding, in violation of Financial Regulation 1.2 which states that 
"Procurement functions include all actions necessary for the acquisition, by purchase or 
lease, of property, including products and real property, and of services, including works. 
The following general principles shall be given due consideration when exercising the 
procurement functions of the United Nations: (a) Best value for money; (6) fairness, 
integrity and transparency; (c) Effective international competition; (d) The interest of the 
United Nations." During the course of the investigation, ID/OIOS learned that the former 
7. 
Nations rules and regulations as described above. These irregularities seem not to have 
been carried out in bad faith because the urgency of the situation necessitated that BTF 
become operational rapidly. However, once operational, both Organizations should have 
taken measures to rectify the problems identified in the allegations. In conclusion, ID/OIOS finds that UNEP and UNOPS departed from United 
8. 
Mr. Francis Montil, Deputy-Director, ID/OIOS at 431-260-60-5420. Should you require further information on this matter, please contact 
9. The favour of a response by 22 May 2005 would be appreciated. 