UNITED NATIONS  
United Nations Interim 
Administration Mission in Kosovo  
  
UNMIK NATIONS UNIES 
Mission d’Administration Intérimaire 
des Nations Unies au Kosovo  
Investigation Task Force 
 
 
Allegations of theft and corruption arising out of the collection of handling and 
landing fees and de-icing costs for passenger aircr aft using Pristina Airport. 
(Case 0283/04) 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
1. This case arises out of an audit report dated 28  February 2003 into the financial 
statements of Pristina International Airport conduc ted by the Chartered 
Accountants which led to an investigation concernin g alleged corruption and 
irregularities arising in the course of procurement s and contracts at Pristina 
International Airport. 
 
2. There are three specific allegations in this rep ort of investigation: 
• Employees overcharged commercial flights using Pri stina Airport for handling and 
landing fees and other services. 
• Employees failed to account for the money paid to them in handling and landing 
fees and other services. 
• Employees requested and /or received corrupt payme nts in return for allocating 
landing slots to airlines at the most convenient ti mes. 
 
 
II. APPLICABLE TERRITORIAL LAWS AND UNITED NATIONS 
PROCEDURAL RULES 
 
Section 1 of UNMIK Regulation 1999/24  dated 12 December 1999 as amended, 
states that the law applicable in Kosovo shall be: 
a) “The regulations promulgated by the Special Repr esentative of the 
Secretary General (SRSG) and subsidiary instruments  issued pursuant to 
those regulations; and  
b) The Law in force in Kosovo on 22 March 1989.” 
 
UN Staff Regulations 1.2 (b)  stipulates “Staff members shall uphold the highest  
standards of efficiency, competence and integrity” 
 
Staff Rule 110.1: Misconduct . “Failure by a staff member to comply with his or her 
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations , the Staff Regulations and the 
Staff Rules or other relevant administrative issuan ces, or to observe the standards of 
conduct expected of an international civil servant,  may amount to unsatisfactory 
conduct within the meaning of staff regulation 10.2 , leading to the institution of 
disciplinary measures for misconduct.” 
 
 
 
  2 
 
 
III. METHODOLOGY 
 
3. This investigation was conducted pursuant to Exe cutive Decision No 2003/16 on 
the establishment of the Investigation Task Force. The ITF investigators 
conducted an enquiry into the allegations raised by  interviews with persons 
indicated to be witnesses and persons potentially i mplicated in the allegations; by 
obtaining documents from the Pristina Airport admin istration and from Pillar IV, 
which were then analysed for relevance to the inqui ry at hand. 
 
4. This report details the findings resulting from these enquiries. 
 
 
IV. BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
 
5. Pristina International Airport constitutes a sta te owned enterprise under 
Yugoslavian law. The assets of the airport include the runways, terminal 
buildings, hanger, fuel storage facilities and equi pment. During the period 
covered by this investigation, from 2001 until 2003 , they were maintained by the 
Public Enterprise Airport Pristina, (PEAP) in coope ration with Military Units of the 
Kosovo Force (KFOR). Pursuant to United Nations Sec urity Council Resolution 
1244 dated 10 June 1999, and UNMIK Regulation No 1/ 1999 dated 25 July 1999, 
UNMIK is mandated to administer the territory of Ko sovo, including state owned 
and publicly owned assets. This includes Pristina I nternational Airport. 
 
6. Until the end of June 2002, responsibility for t he administration of the Pristina 
Airport was entrusted to the Civil Administration P illar (Pillar II) of UNMIK, 
including Official 1 and Official 2. Pillar II supe rvised the Department of Transport 
and Infrastructure (DOTI) Official 1. The DOTI was later known as the Transport 
Sector of the UNMIK Directorate of Infrastructure A ffairs.  DOTI Official 1 left 
UNMIK at the end of June 2002. DOTI Official 2 was recruited by the DOTI as an 
international staff member on 31 July 2000 in charg e of airport operations, 
reporting to DOTI Official 1, and continued in this  role until 30 September 2001. 
Engineering expertise was provided by a series of e ngineers seconded from the 
armed forces of a United Nations member state, spec ifically Airport Engineer I, 
Airport Engineer 2 and Airport Engineer 3, and late r by the Consultant from the 
Consulting Firm. 
 
7. On 1 July 2002, the responsibility for the admin istration of the Airport passed 
from Pillar II to the Kosovo Trust Agency (KTA) and  Pillar IV. The Divisional 
Manager was appointed at the Airport Sector, KTA at  the same time. Under him 
were the PEAP Official and the Air Traffic Control Services (ATCS) Official. 
 
8. On 1 April 2004 Pristina International Airport, which had until that time been 
under the jurisdiction of KFOR was handed over to c ivilian jurisdiction, under 
ICAO regulations. 
 
9. It is against this background of change that pro curement procedures relating to 
the following contract have been examined. 
  3 
 
V. INVESTIGATION DETAILS  
 
10. This case concerns allegations of corruption by  staff at Pristina Airport arising 
from handling and landing fees levied on passenger aircraft using the Airport in 
the period January – December 2001. The case also d eals with allegations of 
corruption arising from de-icing costs levied on pa ssenger aircraft using the 
Airport during the same period and alleged requests  for corrupt payments for the 
allocation of landing slots to airlines at the most  convenient times. 
 
11. Samples were taken from a total of 21 airlines using the airport at Pristina in 
2001. The year 2001 was selected due to the fact th at fees appear to have been 
collected and receipts issued manually. Therefore, it was assessed that a greater 
risk of fraudulent activity existed. 
 
12. Where possible, similar dates and the type of a ircraft were selected to allow for a 
comparative analysis of landing charges and passeng er charges. 
 
13. An average price was then calculated for each t ype of aircraft by selecting a 
sample of landings for each airline and multiplied by the number of flights to give 
an estimate of the total income from landing fees. 
 
14. The ITF obtained a price list, dated 1 January 2002, which provides an indication 
as to the respective costs for basic airport servic es, based on the weight of the 
aircraft.  
 
Handling Fees and De-icing costs 
 
15. The total income from landing fees in 2001 was estimated at DM 14,357,949 
(equivalent to €7,341,163. This compares with a fig ure of €7,376,182 in the profit 
and loss accounts produced by the Chartered Account ants.  
 
16. This result suggests that in the absence of fur ther information, the aircraft 
charges agreed with the figures produced in the off icial accounts of the Airport. 
However, the integrity of the information on which the accounts are based cannot 
be verified. The possibility therefore remains that  airlines were routinely 
overcharged. 
 
17. It was noted that there are small variations in  the prices charged to different 
airlines for the same type of aircraft. However, ce rtain airlines appeared to have 
measurably lower costs. These were: 
• Airline 1 – Average DM 2190 
• Airline 2 – Average DM 2888. 
 
18. The receipts books do not indicate whether Airl ine 1 carried passengers and if so, 
how many.  
 
19. It was notable that where aircraft requested de -icing facilities, this appears to 
have added considerably to the landing fees costs.  
 
20. A schedule was created detailing costs associat ed with de-icing. With the 
possible exception of one Airline 3 flight, this do es not appear to indicate any  
  4 
 
 
obvious anomalies, although it again did not take i nto account the possibility that 
airlines were uniformly being overcharged for de-ic ing. 
 
 
Landing Fees 
 
21. Passenger taxes appear to be charged at 25 DM p er passenger. A spreadsheet 
was created detailing the total number of persons t ravelling in the period 1 
February 2001 until 31 December 2001 together with the number of persons not 
paying passenger tax. The file did not contain any data for the month of January 
2001. 
 
22. The spreadsheet produced by the ITF indicated a  total of 375,472 passengers 
during the relevant period, of whom, 18,996 did not  pay the required passenger 
tax. If this number is multiplied by 25 DM and conv erted to Euro per paying 
passenger, this gives a total of €4,799,395 as agai nst a stated income figure in 
the accounts of €4,919,190 for the whole year. This  gap is diminished if a number 
of passengers were to be added for the month of Jan uary 2001. 
 
23. However, there remains a possibility that the p assengers were not being charged 
airport tax when they should have been, or that the  sums detailed in the accounts 
do not equate with sums actually paid. 
 
24. In an effort to verify whether or not airlines were being routinely overcharged for 
handling and landing fees or de-icing costs, the IT F sent a request to IATA to 
provide information from Airline 3, Airline 4, Airl ine 5 and Airline 6 concerning any 
instances of overcharging or extortion of money by staff at Pristina Airport. The 
request also sought information concerning any inst ances of corruption arising 
from the allocation of landing slots at Pristina Ai rport. 
 
25. Regrettably, to date, no substantive response h as been received from the airlines 
or IATA. 
 
 
VI. CONCLUSIONS  
 
26. Whilst the figures for handling and landing fee s broadly agree with the figures 
produced in the accounts of the Airport, it is not possible to ascertain whether the 
source of information forming the basis of the acco unts is reliable. 
 
27. In the absence of cooperation from the Airlines  and IATA, despite repeated 
requests by the ITF, it is not possible to progress  the case further. 
 
 
VII. RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
28. It is therefore recommended that based on the r esults of this investigation, 
UNMIK should prepare an official request to the abo ve-mentioned airlines in an 
effort to obtain their support and any information relevant to this matter. 
(IV04/283/01) 
 