United Nations Nations Unies 
INTEROFFICE MEMORANDUM MEMORANDUM INTERIEUR 
DATE: 28 July 2004 
REFERENCE: ITF/04/02(Case# 02 16/04) 
TO: Mr . Charles Brayshaw 
A: Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General 
THROUGH: 
SIC DE: 
FROM: John Todd Senior Investigator 
Investigation Task Force 
SUBJECT: Alleged Violations of Procurement Procedures - Insurance (No. 0216104) 
OBJET: 
1. In April 2004, the Investigation Task Force (ITF) received information alleging 
possible violations of UNMUK procurement procedures involving the purchase of 
insurance cover for the Pristina Airport commencing as of 1 April 2004, 
2. This insurance was obtained by UNMIK with the assistance of the Icelandic Civil 
Aviation Administration (ICAA). An agreement between UNMIK and the ICAA 
of 1 April 2004 specified the procedures as follows: 
"UNMIK shall, with the assistance of Iceland as described in WPVI-I of 
Schedule VI, if requested, obtain and maintain appropriate insurances for 
the airport, its equipment, facilities, operations, and sewices from 
reputable insurers. UNMIK shall, as and when reasonably required by 
Iceland, provide Iceland with satisfacto y evidence of such insurance. 
'YCAA will provide assistance in acquiring liability insurance t.,t cover the 
operation at Pristina Airport. The ICAA will use results from similar 
activities for acquiring liability insurance for Icelandic Airports (. . .). Most 
of the activities will be performed in Iceland (...). " WPV 1 - 1 reads: 
3. The insurance coverage arranged by ICAA commenced on 1 April 2004; 
however, previously obtained insurance policy for the airport - for the time-frame 
prior to 1 April 2004 - was not cancelled. 
4. The ITF inquired with staff at Pristina Airport dealing with insurance issues, and 
analyzed correspondence between these staff members and ICAA representatives. 
The documentation identified that the reason for double-coverage was the lack of 
a detailed insurance policy for the new coverage. KTA and Airport 
representatives had contacted ICAA several times for such policy documents and 
felt uncomfortable canceling the old policy without comprehensive information 
about the new one. 
5. Further, in interviews with the ITF, the Airport personnel did not know whether 
the ICAA was required to follow UNMIK procurement protocols. However, a 
KTA Internal Audit Department staff member confirmed that no breaches of KTA 
rules, UNMIK procurement rules, or the above-mentioned agreement could be identified in the purchase of the new policy through the ICAA. The ITF hrther 
concludes that UNMIK procurement rules were not applicable to the ICAA as the 
agreement between UNMIK and the ICAA (for the government of Iceland) is 
prevailing and does not identify such a requirement. 
6. There is also no evidence of improper collusion or negotiations during the 
requisitioning process of the insurance policy, nor is no evidence that the process 
was corrupted. 
7. Finally, the ITF can report that comprehensive policy documents have been 
provided by the ICAA and the previous insurance policy has been cancelled. 
8. If you have any questions or comments regarding this report, please do not 
hesitate to contact Mr. Mark Gough, Chief, Peacekeeping Investigations Unit, in 
our Vienna office at +43-1-26060-5406. 
Cc: Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, USG, DPKO 
Ipav 