Page 1 of 2 UNITED NATIONS  
United Nations Interim 
Administration Mission 
in Kosovo   
UNMIK  NATIONS UNIES  
Mission d’Administration 
Intérimaire des Nations Unies 
au Kosovo  
 
UNMIK 
 
Investigation Task Force 
 
 
 
Date: December 3 rd , 2004   
Reference: ITF/kh / 04 / 03 
 
To:  
A:  
Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen 
SRSG, UNMIK 
 
From: 
De:   
Wolfgang Nikolaus 
Team Leader, Investigation Task Force, UNMIK 
 
Subject: 
Object: 
  
Alleged misappropriation of funds – Manager  
(Case No. 050/04)  
 
 
1.  The Investigation Task Force (ITF) has been investi gating an allegation regarding 
administrative irregularities regarding the insuran ce coverage for Pristina Airport 
by a London-based Company, who then purchased the c over from Insurance 
Company 1 between 2001 and 2003.  
2.  Based on extensive documentation obtained from UNMI K Pillar II, the Kosovo 
Trust Agency (KTA) and Public Enterprise Airport Pr istina (PEAP), the ITF 
determined that the responsible Manager did not und ertake efforts in 2002 or 
2003 to invite international tenders for the Airpor t’s insurance coverage. 
According to UNMIK regulations 1999/2 – Finance Adm inistration Instruction on 
Public Procurement using Kosovo Consolidated Funds – and in view of the cost 
of the premiums of more than $125,000 USD, such a t ender should have been 
undertaken. The Manager did not prepare an internat ional tender for at least the 
period 2 October 2003 to 1 October 2004, instead, h e concluded a contract in 
favour of Insurance Company 1 effecting insurance c overage pertaining to 
Pristina International Airport for a further year. It should be considered as to 
whether this conduct demonstrates probable cause wi th regard to the waste or 
misappropriation of public funds. Such an issue sho uld be determined by a review 
of the matter by the Department of Justice. 
3.  The ITF investigation also adduced evidence of doub le insurance coverage at 
Pristina International Airport. On 1 April 2004, an  Icelandic Civil Aviation 
Administration (ICAA) assumed the responsibility to  ensure air safety at Pristina Page 2 of 2 International Airport and established new insurance  coverage package for aviation 
liability guaranteed by Insurance Company 2. That t ask was undertaken at the 
request of UNMIK.  
4.  The Manager had direct contact with the above-menti oned Insurance Ccompany 2 
for the preparation of the new coverage. Despite th e fact that the Airport 
insurance coverage by London-based Company/Insuranc e Company 1 was valid 
until 2 October 2004, the insurance coverage arrang ed by UNMIK and the 
Insurance Company 2 commenced on 1 April 2004 and i ncluded the same 
insurance substance, but with even higher sums insu red and several small 
amendments.  
5.  The contract with Insurance Company 1 covered the p eriod 2 October 2003 to 1 
October 2004. According to the Insurance Company 1 Contract Policy dated 9 
July 2002, paragraph 4 of the General Conditions, t he “…Policy may be cancelled 
at any time at the written request of the Insured …  provided 30 days notice …”. 
The Manager would appear to have ignored that fact.  The airport therefore had 
two insurance packages for the period 1 April to 1 October 2004. The financial 
loss for Pristina International Airport arises from  this duplicate insurance 
coverage. 
6.  ITF investigators have conducted three administrati ve interviews, including of the 
suspect. As a result of these interviews, the ITF b elieves there is a prima facie 
case against the Manager for offence(s) against the  Provisional Criminal 
Procedure Code of Kosovo.  
7.  The ITF, by this memorandum, advises you of our pre liminary findings and seeks 
your approval for the matter to be forwarded to the  Department of Justice for 
appropriate judicial review. The ITF file will be m ade available to the Department 
of Justice for the purposes of that review and any future judicial investigation.  
8.  Any questions or comments on the above information should be addressed to Mr 
Wolfgang Nikolaus, Head, ITF (ext. 3896) in Pristin a, or Mr Mark Gough, 
ID/OIOS Vienna on +43 1 26060 5406. 
 
 
Copy to:  Mr. James Wasserstrom, OPOE 
  Mr. Paul-Lachal Roberts, OLAF 
  Mr. Mark Gough, ID/OIOS 
 
 
 