UNITED NATIONS  
United Nations Interim 
Administration Mission  
in Kosovo   
UNMIK NATIONS UNIES 
Mission d’Administration 
Intérimaire des Nations Unies 
au Kosovo  
 
INVESTIGATION TASK FORCE 
 
Investigation into Allegations of Bribery and Favou ritism in Procurement of Uniforms 
by Pristina Airport 
(ITF Case No. 0462/04) 
 
I. Background and Allegations 
 
1. A Kosovo Trust Agency (KTA) Internal Audit Unit (IAU) Internal Memorandum dated 4 
October 2004, which described the audit of the proc urement of staff uniforms by Pristina 
Airport, raised concerns as to the reasoning for th e cancellation of a competitive tender 
for summer and winter uniforms (Pristina Airport Re ference No. PEAP/CG/UAS/19/05/04) 
and the subsequent issue of a single source contrac t for summer uniforms for new staff 
(Pristina Airport Reference No. SHKTA/CG/16-04). 
 
2. In the IAU memo, reference is made to a letter o f complaint dated 28-06-04 from Vendor 
1, a company that competed for the tender and that was subsequently awarded the single 
source contract to supply summer uniforms. The auth or of the letter, Vendor 1 Manager, 
alleged the existence of rumours and witnesses in t he matter of the bribery of 
Procurement Officer 1, Pristina Airport, and the Fi nance Officer, Pristina Airport, by one of 
Vendor 1 Manager’s competitors in the tender proces s, Vendor 2. Vendor 1 Manager’s 
letter also identified his intention to seek legal action against Procurement Officer 1 for 
allegedly violating “the procurement rules” by:  re placing a member of the Bid Evaluation 
Committee in the competitive tender; allowing a mem ber of the Finance Department, the 
Finance Officer, to sit on the committee; and favou ring Vendor 2 in the tender process. 
 
3. During the course of the investigation, Procurem ent Officer 1 told the ITF that, following 
the cancellation of the competitive tender, Vendor 1 Manager had made utterances to 
him/her that Procurement Officer 1 had interpreted as a threat. 
 
4. The ITF commenced an inquiry into the allegation s regarding the procurement process 
and now provides a summary of the case and its find ings and recommendations. 
 
 
II. Applicable Law  
 
5. The law applicable to each of the allegations is  detailed below. 
 
Allegation 1 : that Procurement Officer 1 and the Finance Office r accepted bribes from Vendor 
2 
 
Provisional Criminal Code of Kosovo – Article 343 “ Accepting Bribes”; Article 344 “Giving 
Bribes” 
 
Finance Administration Instruction No. 2/1999 (Revi sed 15 December 1999) – Public 
Procurement Using Kosovo Consolidated Budget Funds – Section 4.3.2 –“Avoidance of 
Conflicts of Interest and Corruption” 
 
Allegation 2 : that Procurement Officer 1 replaced a member of t he Bid Evaluation Committee 
 
Finance Administration Instruction No. 2/1999 (Revi sed 15 December 1999) – Public 
Procurement Using Kosovo Consolidated Budget Funds – Section 4.1 “Full and Fair 
Competition”; Section 23.9 “Examination and Evaluat ion of Tenders” 
 
Allegation 3 : that Procurement Officer 1 inappropriately includ ed the Finance Officer in the Bid 
Evaluation Committee 
   2Finance Administration Instruction No. 2/1999 (Revi sed 15 December 1999) – Public 
Procurement Using Kosovo Consolidated Budget Funds – Section 4.1 “Full and Fair 
Competition”; Section 23.9 “Examination and Evaluat ion of Tenders” 
 
Allegation 4 : that Procurement Officer 1 favoured Vendor 2 in t he tender process 
 
Finance Administration Instruction No. 2/1999 (Revi sed 15 December 1999) – Public 
Procurement Using Kosovo Consolidated Budget Funds – Section 4.1 “Full and Fair 
Competition” 
 
Allegation 5 : that Vendor 1 Manager threatened Procurement Offi cer 1 
 
Provisional Criminal Code of Kosovo – Article 161 “ Threat” 
 
 
III. Investigation Details  
 
6. Procurement Officer 1 managed the competitive te nder for the supply of uniforms. In 
addition to Vendor 1, Vendor 2 and Vendor 3 submitt ed bids following which Procurement 
Officer 1 convened and chaired a Bid Opening Commit tee on 10-06-04. Present, in 
addition to the committee that comprised members of  the various airport work groups, 
were representatives of the three bidding companies  including Vendor 1 Manager. 
 
7. Procurement Officer 1 also formed and chaired a Bid Evaluation Committee to assess the 
offerings of the competitors, which comprised a ran ge of uniforms and accessories for the 
various categories of airport employees. On 18-06-0 4, the committee, though not satisfied 
with all Vendor 2’s samples, tentatively decided in  favour of that company, the median 
bidder in terms of price (Vendor 1 was the highest bidder). The committee resolved that 
Vendor 2 would be approached to determine the feasi bility of no-cost design changes to 
one of the uniforms for women employees. The commit tee reconvened on 23-06-04 at the 
request of Pristina Airport Official. During the me eting, Pristina Airport Official announced 
the cancellation of the tender. Pristina Airport Of ficial later awarded a single-source 
procurement contract for summer uniforms for newly hired staff, in the amount of 
€106,059, to Vendor 1, which had supplied uniforms to the airport under two previous 
contracts. 
 
Allegation 1 : that Procurement Officer 1 and the Finance Office r accepted bribes from Vendor 
2 
 
8. When asked by the ITF to substantiate his/her al legation that Procurement Officer 1 and 
the Finance Officer had accepted bribes from Vendor  2, Vendor 1 Manager said that 
he/she had heard the rumours in Pristina coffee bar s but that he/she could not remember 
from whom he/she had heard these rumours. He/she sa id that the witnesses to whom 
he/she had referred in his letter of complaint were  actually the same persons from whom 
he/she heard the rumours. Vendor 1 Manager was unab le to suggest which 
representative of Vendor 2 had paid the bribes. 
 
9. Vendor 2 Employee who attended the meeting of th e Bid Opening Committee; Vendor 2 
Manager; and Vendor 2 Director all told ITF that th ey had not paid bribes to Procurement 
Officer 1 and/or the Finance Officer. 
 
10. Procurement Officer 1 and the Finance Officer b oth denied accepting bribes or any other 
consideration from any person in this matter. 
 
Allegation 2 : that Procurement Officer 1 replaced a member of t he Bid Evaluation Committee 
 
11. Procurement Officer 1 explained to the ITF that  the original nominee to the committee, 
Committee member 1, had not been at work on the day  that the committee first convened 
and, therefore, had been replaced by Committee memb er 2, who then attended the 
second session for continuity purposes. Committee m ember 1 and Committee member 2 
confirmed Procurement Officer 1’s explanation for t he replacement. 
   3Allegation 3 : that Procurement Officer 1 inappropriately includ ed the Finance Officer in the Bid 
Evaluation Committee 
 
12. The Finance Officer, Procurement Officer 1 and Pristina Airport Official told the ITF that 
the Finance Officer participated on the Bid Evaluat ion Committee. However, Procurement 
Officer 1 and Pristina Airport Official each said t hat the other had nominated the Finance 
Officer to the committee. KTA legal staff advised t he ITF that the wisdom of allowing a 
representative of the Finance Department to partici pate in bid evaluations is questionable 
because, generally, officers whose function involve s payment should not evaluate 
contractors to whom payment will become due. Accord ing to KTA legal staff, however, 
such participation is not precluded by any rule or law. Section 23.9.2 of Finance 
Administration Instruction No. 2/1999 (Revised 15 D ecember 1999) – Public Procurement 
Using Kosovo Consolidated Budget Funds precludes on ly an “approving officer” from the 
Procuring Entity who will eventually sign a contrac t from serving as a tender evaluator. 
The Finance Officer was not an “approving officer” in this procurement process and, 
therefore, was not prevented from serving as an eva luator. 
 
Allegation 4 : that Procurement Officer 1 favoured Vendor 2 in t he tender process 
 
13. In addition to Procurement Officer 1 and the Fi nance Officer, Bid Evaluation Committee 
members Committee member 3, Committee member 4, Com mittee member 5, 
Committee member 6, Committee member 2, and Committ ee member 7 told the ITF that 
the conduct of the committee was completely fair an d proper. (Committee member 4 told 
the ITF that he/she attended the first session of t he Bid Evaluation Committee but that 
he/she missed the second session because of the ill ness of his son.) The general 
consensus of the committee was that Vendor 2’s samp les were better overall in terms of 
quality and design but the committee was not comple tely satisfied with Vendor 2’s goods. 
However, Pristina Airport Official told the ITF tha t the committee was divided during the 
second session, with one group preferring Vendor 2’ s goods and the other preferring 
those of Vendor 1. Pristina Airport Official said t hat Procurement Officer 1 (who, as 
committee chair, did not have the right to vote) an d the Finance Officer argued in favour 
of Vendor 2. None of the committee members supporte d Pristina Airport Official’s 
assertions in this regard. 
 
14. The ITF allowed Pristina Airport Official to re view a copy of the Bid Evaluation Committee 
report prepared by Procurement Officer 1, the last page of which listed the attendees at 
the session of the Bid Opening Committee (Procureme nt Officer 1 and the Finance 
Officer were the only members of the Bid Opening Co mmittee who also served on the Bid 
Evaluation Committee). Upon looking at the attendee  list of the Bid Opening Committee, 
Pristina Airport Official named the committee membe rs who, he/she said, had Vendor 1’s 
and Vendor 2’s samples respectively. He/she correct ly identified Procurement Officer 1 
and the Finance Officer but the other four persons whom he/she named were members of 
the Bid Opening Committee, not the Bid Evaluation C ommittee. Pristina Airport Official’s 
mistaken identification of these persons as Bid Eva luation Committee members indicates 
that his memory of the events of the second committ ee meeting might be unclear. 
 
15. Pristina Airport Official told the ITF that he/ she believed that had he/she not cancelled the 
competitive tender, the Bid Evaluation Committee wo uld have awarded the contract to 
Vendor 2. Pristina Airport Official said that he/sh e believed that Procurement Officer 1 
had been “primed” to award the contract to Vendor 2  because Procurement Officer 1 had 
expressed a preference for and argued in support of  Vendor 2’s” inferior product and 
because a source (whose identity Pristina Airport O fficial was unable to recall) had told 
him/her that Procurement Officer 1 had been driven to the airport on several occasions by 
a person in either the Ministry of Finance or the M inistry of Transportation who was 
associated with Vendor 2. Pristina Airport Official  said that he/she cancelled the 
competitive tender for these reasons. He/she said t hat he/she did not voice his suspicions 
during the committee meeting, adding that he/she di d not subsequently report his 
suspicions because “priming” is common and if he/sh e reported every instance he/she 
would not have time to do his job. He/she said that  proving that Procurement Officer 1 
had “pushed” one competitor would have been difficu lt. 
 
16. Procurement Officer 1 told the ITF that a forme r Kosovo Minister is his godfather. He/she 
said that he/she has never received a ride to the a irport from the Former Kosovo Minister   4or in his car. He/she said that he/she has no idea whether the Former Kosovo Minister is 
in any way associated with Vendor 2. He/she said th at neither the Former Kosovo 
Minister nor any other person pressured him/her to show favouritism to Vendor 2. 
 
17. Pristina Airport Official told the ITF that he/ she had not seen Vendor 1 Manager’s letter of 
complaint and had never heard of Vendor 1 Manager’s  allegation regarding the bribery of 
Procurement Officer 1 and the Finance Officer. Howe ver, Pristina Airport Official’s 
administrative assistant said that he/she had been present when Vendor 1 Manager 
voiced his suspicion to Pristina Airport Official t hat an individual from the airport had 
accepted bribes. Pristina Airport Official’ adminis trative assistant said that he/she could 
not recall to whom Vendor 1 Manager referred. In ad dition, he/she told the ITF that 
Vendor 1 Manager had given him/her his letter of co mplaint. Pristina Airport Official’s 
administrative assistant said that he/she does not recall whether he/she handed the letter 
to Pristina Airport Official or left it for his att ention and he/she does not recall Pristina 
Airport Official mentioning the letter. 
 
18. Pristina Airport Official told the ITF that, fo llowing the cancellation of the competitive 
tender, his only alternative to obtain uniforms for  newly hired staff was to award a contract 
to Vendor 1, who had supplied the airport for the p ast two years. He/she said that had 
he/she let a new tender for summer uniforms, the un iforms would not have been ready 
until the end of August (2004). 
 
19. ITF allowed Pristina Airport Official to read a  copy of a memo dated 30-06-04 to him/her 
from Procurement Officer 1 that described the event s of the tender process and 
summarized the reasons for its cancellation. Pristi na Airport Official told the ITF that, 
although he/she had signed the memo, he/she had not  “really read” it previously. The 
articulated reasons for the cancellation are listed  below. Pristina Airport Official and 
Procurement Officer 1 said that they had contribute d to the list of reasons but disagreed 
over which of the reasons had been provided by whom , however, they both said that 
Pristina Airport Official had provided the term “un satisfactory quality”. 
 
i) unsatisfactory quality 
ii) unsatisfactory design 
iii) evaluation committee not satisfied with the un iforms 
iv) no manufacturing details were given 
v) documents not completed 
 
20. Procurement Officer 2 told the ITF that he/she transmitted several documents regarding 
the single-source procurement of summer uniforms to  KTA. Included in the document 
package was a Procurement Memo dated 07-07-04 signe d by Pristina Airport Official and, 
according to Procurement Officer 2, prepared by Pri stina Airport Official. (Pristina Airport 
Official told the ITF that he/she believes that he/ she wrote the justification.) The 
justification segment of the memo stated that unifo rms would be obtained by single-
source procurement from the current supplier (Vendo r 1) for reasons of good quality and 
durability. 
 
21. The ITF pointed out to Pristina Airport Officia l that he/she had referred to the same 
uniforms as being of “unsatisfactory quality” and “ good quality” in the respective 
documents. He/she then admitted “flowering up” his memo and providing embellishment 
to ensure that KTA would approve the procurement. H e/she said that the term 
“unsatisfactory quality” in the memo dated 30-06-04  was poorly chosen and that the 
quality of Vendor 1’s uniforms actually met the air port’s requirements. However, he/she 
said that the design of the uniforms design was “ba sic and poor.” 
 
Allegation 5 : that Vendor 1 Manager threatened Procurement Offi cer 1 
 
22. Procurement Officer 1 told the ITF that, on a d ay (he/she could not specify the date) 
following the second meeting of the Bid Evaluation Committee at which the decision was 
taken to cancel the competitive tender, Vendor 1 Ma nager entered Procurement Officer 
1’s office and, in the presence of Procurement Offi cer 2 and a Pristina Airport Civil 
Engineer made utterances that Procurement Officer 1  interpreted as a threat. According 
to Procurement Officer 1, Vendor 1 Manager said tha t he/she would meet Procurement 
Officer 1 outside; that, because he/she had cancell ed the tender, Procurement Officer 1   5would find out who Vendor 1 Manager was; and that P rocurement Officer 1 would see 
what he/she had done by canceling the tender. 
 
23. Procurement Officer 2 assistant confirmed that he/she had been present during the 
incident but he/she had paid only partial attention  to what transpired. He/She said that 
Vendor 1 Manager might have mentioned that Procurem ent Officer 1 would have to deal 
with KTA Internal Audit and the Investigation Task Force. The Civil Engineer also 
confirmed his presence and said that he/she could r ecall Vendor 1 Manager saying 
something to the effect of “You have to see who I a m.” The Civil Engineer said that 
he/she interpreted the words to mean that Procureme nt Officer 1 should be afraid of 
Vendor 1 Manager. 
 
24. Vendor 1 Manager confirmed that an incident had  occurred between him/her and 
Procurement Officer 1. Vendor 1 Manager said that h e/she told Procurement Officer 1 
that he/she was the main reason for the cancellatio n of the tender and that he/she told 
Procurement Officer 1 “You’ll see what you have don e. You’ll see that I’ll go to the highest 
levels and if necessary, I’ll see you in court.” Ve ndor 1 Manager said that he/she did not 
ask Procurement Officer 1 to go outside with him/he r, that he/she did not threaten 
Procurement Officer 1 and did not imply that he/she  would commit physical aggression. 
 
 
IV. Findings of Fact 
 
Allegation 1 : that Procurement Officer 1 and the Finance Office r accepted bribes from Vendor 
2 
 
25. The ITF did not find any evidence to support th e allegation that Procurement Officer 1 
and/or the Finance Officer accepted bribes from Ven dor 2 in this matter. Moreover, the 
ITF did not find evidence that any person received a bribe or other compensation or a 
promise of a bribe or other compensation in relatio n to either the competitive tender or the 
single-source procurement. Therefore, the allegatio n of bribery is considered to be 
unsubstantiated. 
 
Allegation 2 : that Procurement Officer 1 replaced a member of t he Bid Evaluation Committee 
 
26. The rationale for replacing the member of the B id Evaluation Committee is reasonable. 
Furthermore, Vendor 1 Manager did not intimate that  the replacement was made for any 
questionable purpose. Therefore, the allegation is considered to be correct but the 
substantive act is not considered to have been base d on ulterior motives. 
 
Allegation 3 : that Procurement Officer 1 inappropriately placed  the Finance Officer on the Bid 
Evaluation Committee 
 
27. The ITF established that the Finance Officer pa rticipated on the committee but did not 
determine whether he/she was nominated by Procureme nt Officer 1 or Pristina Airport 
Official. Regardless, the ITF did not identify any indication that The Finance Officer’s 
behaviour on the committee was in any way unprofess ional or improper. In the absence 
of specific regulations precluding the participatio n of finance personnel in such processes, 
this allegation is considered to be unsubstantiated . 
 
Allegation 4 : that Procurement Officer 1 favoured Vendor 2 in t he tender process 
 
28. The ITF did not find any evidence to support th e allegation that Procurement Officer 1 had 
favoured Vendor 2 during the tender process. Simila rly, Pristina Airport Official’s opinion 
that Procurement Officer 1 had been “primed” to sel ect Vendor 2 is unsubstantiated. The 
credibility of Pristina Airport Official’s portraya l of Procurement Officer 1 as a strong 
proponent of Vendor 2 in a divided committee was co ntradicted by the committee 
members themselves and undermined by Pristina Airpo rt Official’s misidentification of 
most of the members. Procurement Officer 1’s manage ment of the proceedings appears 
to have been fair and objective based on the assert ions of the members of the Bid 
Evaluation Committee. Therefore, this allegation is  considered to be unsubstantiated. 
 
Allegation 5 : that Vendor 1 Manager threatened Procurement Offi cer 1   6 
29. The ITF was unable to substantiate that Vendor 1 Manager’s utterances constituted a 
threat against Procurement Officer 1. 
 
 
V. Recommendations 
 
30.  The ITF offers the following recommendations: 
 
Recommendation No. 1 : It is recommended that UNMIK Pillar IV inform Pro curement Officer 1 
and the Finance Officer, as well as the KTA Interna l Audit Unit, that the ITF did not find any 
wrongdoing on the part of Procurement Officer 1 or the Finance Officer. (IV04/462/01) 
 
Recommendation No. 2 : It is recommended that UNMIK provide this report to both the 
Department of Justice and the Financial Investigati on Unit for information purposes, so as to 
assist current investigations related to the allege d payment of “kickbacks” in exchange for 
employment at Pristina Airport. (IV04/462/02) 
 
 