UNITED NATIONS  
United Nations Interim 
Administration Mission in Kosovo  
  
UNMIK NATIONS UNIES 
Mission d’Administration Intérimaire 
des Nations Unies au Kosovo  
Investigation Task Force 
 
 
 
Investigation into allegations of irregularities in  two tender processes for the 
supply of cleaning machines to Pristina Airport. (Case 0280/04 ) 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
1. This case arises out of an audit report dated 28  February 2003 into the financial 
statements of Pristina International Airport conduc ted by the Chartered 
Accountants which led to an investigation concernin g alleged corruption and 
irregularities arising in the course of procurement s and contracts at Pristina 
International Airport. 
 
2. There are two specific allegations in this repor t of investigation:  
• no proper description of the cabins for the cleani ng machines was included by 
companies submitting bids in the first tender; 
• tender specifications for both tenders the cleanin g machines were taken from the 
brochure of one of the companies submitting a tende r, thereby giving it an unfair 
advantage in the tender process. 
 
 
II. APPLICABLE TERRITORIAL LAWS AND UNITED NATIONS 
PROCEDURAL RULES 
 
Section 1 of UNMIK Regulation 1999/24  dated 12 December 1999 as amended, 
states that the law applicable in Kosovo shall be: 
a) “The regulations promulgated by the Special Repr esentative of the 
Secretary-General (SRSG) and subsidiary instruments  issued pursuant to 
those regulations; and  
b) The Law in force in Kosovo on 22 March 1989.” 
 
UN Staff Regulations 1.2 (b)  stipulates “Staff members shall uphold the highest  
standards of efficiency, competence and integrity” 
 
UNMIK Finance Administrative Instruction 1999/2 on Public Procurement using 
Kosovo Consolidated Budget Funds  provides that: 
Article 4 1  – “Competition among and participation in the proc urement process 
shall be maximised.” 
Article 4.1.1  – “All Suppliers and Contractors and their tenders  shall be treated 
fairly, equally, and non-discriminatorily, without favouritism or prejudice and each 
Tender shall be judged on its merits.” 
Article 4.3.3 . – “If a consultant or any principal, officer or e mployee of such 
consultant has participated or will participate in any manner in the preparation of  2 
the UNMIK Kosovo Interim Administration’s Tendering  for a contract, including 
but not limited to preparations of specifications o r any other Tender Documents,  
 
no such consultant nor any principal officer or emp loyee of such consultant, no 
“related person” nor any “illegal payer” may tender  for or sponsor or participate in 
the Tendering for such contract.” 
Article 15 1 – “ Technical specifications and descriptions of the Go ods, Works, or 
Services to be procured shall be carefully prepared  to foster fair and open 
competition among all suppliers.” 
Article 15.4 – “ There shall be no requirements or reference in the technical 
specifications to a particular trademark, brand nam e, patent, design, type, origin, 
producer or service provider unless (a) there is no  sufficiently precise or 
intelligible way of describing the procurement requ irements and (b) qualifying 
words, such as “or equivalent” are included in such  requirement or reference.” 
 
Staff Rule 110.1: Misconduct . “Failure by a staff member to comply with his or her 
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations , the Staff Regulations and the 
Staff Rules or other relevant administrative issuan ces, or to observe the standards of 
conduct expected of an international civil servant,  may amount to unsatisfactory 
conduct within the meaning of staff regulation 10.2 , leading to the institution of 
disciplinary measures for misconduct.” 
 
 
I. METHODOLOGY 
 
3. This investigation was conducted pursuant to Exe cutive Decision No 2003/16 on 
the establishment of the Investigation Task Force. The ITF investigators 
conducted an enquiry into the allegations raised by  interviews with persons 
indicated to be witnesses and persons potentially i mplicated in the allegations; by 
obtaining documents from the Pristina Airport admin istration and from Pillar IV, 
which were then analysed for relevance to the inqui ry at hand. 
 
 
II. BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
 
4. Pristina International Airport constitutes a sta te owned enterprise under 
Yugoslavian law. The assets of the airport include the runways, terminal 
buildings, hanger, fuel storage facilities and equi pment. During the period 
covered by this investigation, from 2001 until 2003 , they were maintained by the 
Public Enterprise Airport Pristina, (PEAP) in coope ration with Military Units of the 
Kosovo Force (KFOR). Pursuant to United Nations Sec urity Council Resolution 
1244 dated 10 June 1999, and UNMIK Regulation No 1/ 1999 dated 25 July 1999. 
UNMIK is mandated to administer the territory of Ko sovo, including state owned 
and publicly owned assets. This includes Pristina I nternational Airport. 
 
5. Until the end of June 2002, responsibility for t he administration of the Pristina 
Airport was entrusted to the Civil Administration P illar (Pillar II) of UNMIK, 
including Official 1 and Official 2. Pillar II supe rvised the Department of Transport 
and Infrastructure (DOTI) Official 1. The DOTI was later known as the Transport 
Sector of the UNMIK Directorate of Infrastructure A ffairs.  DOTI Official 1 left 
UNMIK at the end of June 2002. DOTI Official 2 was recruited by the DOTI as an  3 
international staff member on 31 July 2000 in charg e of airport operations, 
reporting to DOTI Official 1, and continued in this  role until 30 September 2001. 
Engineering expertise was provided by a series of e ngineers seconded from the 
armed forces of a United Nations member state, spec ifically Airport Engineer 1, 
Airport Engineer 2 and Airport Engineer 3 and later  by the Consultant from the 
Consulting Firm. 
 
6. On 1 July 2002, the responsibility for the admin istration of the Airport passed 
from Pillar II to the Kosovo Trust Agency (KTA) and  Pillar IV. The Divisional 
Manager was appointed to the Airport Sector, KTA at  the same time. Under him 
were the PEAP Official and the Air Traffic Control Services (ATCS) Official 1. 
 
7. On 1 April 2004 Pristina International Airport, which had until that time been 
under the jurisdiction of KFOR was handed over to c ivilian jurisdiction, under 
ICAO regulations. 
 
8. It is against this background of change that pro curement procedures relating to 
the following contract have been examined. 
 
 
III. INVESTIGATION DETAILS  
 
9. This part of the investigation relates to two te nders for a contract, for the supply 
of cleaning machines at Pristina Airport. The value  of the contract was 
€180,816.00. 
 
Allegation 1 
(It is alleged that the first tender was irregularl y cancelled due to the fact that no 
proper description of the cabins for the cleaning m achines was included by 
companies submitting bids in the first tender) 
 
10. A bid evaluation report drawn up by the Procure ment Officer, dated 18 April 
2003, identifies that bids were opened in an evalua tion process to select a 
company to supply cleaning machines to Pristina Air port on 18 April 2003. 
However, a notification letter from the PEAP Offici al and the KTA Divisional 
Manager to the companies participating in the tende r exercise dated 6 June 2003 
confirms that this tender was cancelled. 
 
11. When asked about the reason for the cancellatio n, the Procurement Officer 1 
stated to the ITF that the technical specifications  for the first tender were taken 
from a catalogue of a certain producer, which offer ed those machines, as a result 
of which it predetermined the winner. He/she added that machinery specified was 
of the most expensive type. (See below allegation 2 ) 
 
12. The Maintenance Official and Member of the Eval uation Committee, when asked 
the same question, stated that the first tender was  cancelled due to the fact that 
the Procurement Officer 1 indicated there had been no proper description of the 
cabins for the cleaning machines in the bids submit ted. However, he/she added 
that from his/her knowledge at least two of the com panies had included a proper 
description of the cabins in their bid documents. 
  4 
13. An Engineer at the Pristina Airport, told the I TF that the Airport requested 
cleaning machines with cabins in order that cleanin g could be carried out in 
different weather conditions. However, the bidders did not include the cabin in 
their bids. He/she did not indicate that two bidder s included a proper description 
in their bid documents. 
 
14. In the light of the evidence provided, and deta iled below, the ITF does not find 
that the first tender was irregularly cancelled due  to the fact that no proper 
description of the cabins for the cleaning machines  was included by companies 
submitting bids in the first tender. 
 
Allegation 2  
 
First tender 
 
(It is alleged that tender specifications for both tenders the cleaning machines were 
taken from the brochure of one of the companies sub mitting a tender, thereby giving 
it an unfair advantage in the tender process) 
 
15. The person responsible for drawing up the speci fications for the both tenders was 
the Engineer at the Pristina Airport, who confirmed  in interview that he/she had 
been asked to draw up the specifications by the Mem ber of the Evaluation 
Committee. He/she also confirmed that the Member of  the Evaluation Committee 
provided him with signed photocopies from the broch ure of Vendor 1 in order to 
assist him in drawing up the specifications. The En gineer at the Pristina Airport 
added that he/she used them as a basis for the tech nical specifications. The ITF 
located a draft of an undated handwritten note from  the Engineer at the Pristina 
Airport to the KTA Divisional Manager, which confir ms that he/she used the 
photocopies from the brochure to assist him in draw ing up the technical 
specifications for the cleaning machines. The Membe r of the Evaluation 
Committee confirmed to the ITF that he/she handed t he signed pages to the 
Engineer at the Pristina Airport to assist in the p reparation of the technical 
specifications for the cleaning machines.  
 
16. The Engineer at the Pristina Airport and the Me mber of the Evaluation Committee 
were asked in interview whether they were aware of the provision of Article 15 of 
Financial Administration Instruction No. 2/1999, an d in particular Articles 15.1 and 
15.4.  The Engineer at the Pristina Airport indicat ed that he/she worked on the 
general principle set out in Article 15.1, but had not seen Article 15.4; whilst the 
Chairman of the Evaluation Committee appeared to be  ignorant of Article 15 
altogether.  
 
Second tender 
 
17. A bid evaluation report dated 30 June 2003 indi cates that a second tender 
exercise was undertaken following the cancellation of the first one.  
 
18. Pristina Airport Procurement Officer 2 in the s econd tender indicated that 
although Procurement Officer 1 published the tender , Procurement Officer 2 did 
the bid opening and was the Member of the Evaluatio n Committee. This is 
confirmed in a memorandum from Procurement Officer 2 to the PEAP Official  5 
dated 9 July 2003, which identifies the evaluation committee members and in an 
ITF interview with Procurement Officer 2, the PEAP Official did not refer to 
Procurement Officer 2 or the second tender evaluati on committee in his/her 
interview. 
 
 
19. Procurement Officer 2 added that the evaluation  committee chose Vendor 2. 
However, after he/she had drafted the contract and letter of acceptance for 
signature, he/she was instructed by the Airport man agement, although he/she did 
not state by whom, to put it on hold until the tech nical evaluation committee and 
airport management had organised a meeting with the  Procurement Officer 1. 
 
20. According to Procurement Officer 2, the reason for the meeting was due to 
concerns that the winning bid was the second most e xpensive and doubts that 
the technical specifications had given an unfair ad vantage to one company. 
 
21. An examination of the technical evaluation repo rt and Vendor 2’s bid 
documentation suggests that the specification produ ced by Vendor 2 was very 
similar to the specification requirement, although there is no evidence that it was 
provided with the technical specifications in advan ce. In addition, Vendor 1, the 
company from whose brochure the specifications were  taken, did not submit a 
bid.  
 
22. An Internet search indicates Vendor 1 is the se cond largest producer of industrial 
cleaning machines in one United Nations member stat e being founded in 1966. It 
went into insolvency in 2002 and was bought by a mu lti-national company. An 
Internet search of its directors does not indicate any connection with Vendor 2. 
There is also no indication that Vendor 2 is connec ted to the multi-national 
company. 
 
23. The Engineer at the Pristina Airport, in interv iew with the ITF, also stated that the 
evaluation committee had raised doubts as to whethe r it would be worthwhile 
purchasing the cleaning machines, which whilst meet ing the specification criteria, 
came at a high price. 
 
 
 
IV. FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
24. The first tender for cleaning machines was canc elled due to alleged deficiencies 
in the description of the cabins for the cleaning m achines in the bids submitted 
and the fact that a brochure from the Vendor 1 was used in the preparation of the 
technical specifications for the cleaning machines.  This gave rise to concerns that 
the technical specifications had given an unfair ad vantage to one company, 
namely Vendor 1. 
 
25. The second tender was not awarded due to concer ns that the technical 
specifications produced from the brochure of Vendor  1 had given an unfair 
advantage to one company; and doubts as to the high  purchase cost of the 
cleaning machines which met the specification crite ria. 
  6 
 
V. CONCLUSIONS 
 
26. On the available information, the decision lead ing to the cancellation of the first 
tender was correct, since concerns had been raised concerning both the 
descriptions of the machines to be purchased and th e fact that a brochure from 
Vendor 1 was used in the preparation of the technic al specifications for the 
cleaning machines. This gave rise to concerns that the technical specifications 
had given an unfair advantage to one company in bre ach of Article 15.1 of  
 
UNMIK Finance Administrative Instruction 1999/2 on Public Procurement using 
Kosovo Consolidated Budget Funds. 
 
 
27. The reasons for the second tender not proceedin g appear to be well founded if 
concerns were expressed over the offer price and th e technical specification. 
However, there is insufficient evidence to indicate  whether in this instance, the 
use of technical specifications from a particular c ompany brochure was a 
deliberate attempt to corrupt the tender process or  due to ignorance of the 
regulations. 
 
 
VI. RECOMMENDATION 
 
28.  Based on the above information, the ITF recomm ends that UNMIK refer this 
report to the D/SRSG Pillar IV for any action deeme d appropriate with regard to 
ensuring that staff involved in preparing tenders d o not utilise technical 
specifications that would give an unfair advantage to individual companies in the 
course of subsequent tender exercises (IV04/280/01) . 
 
 
 
 