UNITED NATIONS  
United Nations Interim 
Administration Mission in Kosovo  
  
UNMIK NATIONS UNIES 
Mission d’Administration Intérimaire 
des Nations Unies au Kosovo  
Investigation Task Force 
 
 
Irregularities in the procurement and contract awar d for Winter and Summer 
Uniforms at Pristina Airport (Case 0275/04) 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
1. This case arises out of an audit report dated 28  February 2003 into the financial 
statements of Pristina International Airport conduc ted by the Chartered 
Accountants, which led to an investigation concerni ng alleged corruption and 
irregularities arising in the course of procurement s and contracts at Pristina 
International Airport. 
 
2. There are seven specific allegations addressed i n this report of investigation: 
• the highest bid received for the winter uniforms w as accepted; 
• there was insufficient information on the bid eval uation sheets for the winter 
and summer uniforms tender exercises; 
• capital expenditure approval for the winter unifor ms contract was signed on 10 
January 2003, after the contract had commenced; 
• the value of the contract for summer uniforms was irregularly set at €3 below 
the limit requiring a competitive tender; 
• two companies were invited to tender for the summe r uniforms contract when 
the evaluation report for the winter uniforms indic ated that Vendor 1 could not 
offer the quality of uniforms required and Vendor 2  produced an incomplete 
offer 
• the invitations to quote for summer uniforms sent out to the companies 
contained differing quantities of items. 
• two further small quantities of uniforms in the su ms of €792 and €1,188  were 
purchased without any supporting documents or justi fication. 
 
II. APPLICABLE TERRITORIAL LAWS AND UNITED NATIONS 
PROCEDURAL RULES 
 
Section 1 of UNMIK Regulation 1999/24  dated 12 December 1999 as amended, 
states that the law applicable in Kosovo shall be: 
a) “The regulations promulgated by the Special Repr esentative of the 
Secretary General (SRSG) and subsidiary instruments  issued pursuant to 
those regulations; and  
b) The Law in force in Kosovo on 22 March 1989.” 
 
UN Staff Regulations 1.2 (b)  stipulates “Staff members shall uphold the highest  
standards of efficiency, competence and integrity.”  
 
UNMIK Finance Administrative Instruction 1999/2 on Public Procurement using 
Kosovo Consolidated Budget Funds  provides that: 
Article 4 1  – “Competition among and participation in the proc urement process shall 
be maximised.”  2 Article 4.1.1  – “All Suppliers and Contractors and their tenders  shall be treated fairly, 
equally, and non-discriminatorily, without favourit ism or prejudice and each Tender 
shall be judged on its merits.” 
Article 4.3.3 . – “If a consultant or any principal, officer or e mployee of such 
consultant has participated or will participate in any manner in the preparation of the 
UNMIK Kosovo Interim Administration’s Tendering for  a contract, including but not 
limited to preparations of specifications or any ot her Tender Documents, no such 
consultant nor any principal officer or employee of  such consultant, no “related 
person” nor any “illegal payer” may tender for or s ponsor or participate in the 
Tendering for such contract.” 
Article 6.1.2 – The limit method of Competitive Shopping … shall no rmally be used 
when the estimated contract value does not exceed D M 50,000. (25,000 Euro)  
Article 6.1.3 – The method of Competitive Tendering ….shall normall y be used 
when the estimated contract value exceeds DM 50,000 . (25,000 Euro) 
Article 24  – “Direct Single Source Procurement may be used fo r Goods, Works or 
Ancillary Physical Services: 
24.1 - If such Direct Single Source Procurement is not used to 
24.1.1 - Avoid Competition 
24.1.2 – Discriminate against other suppliers and  
24.2 – Direct Single Source Procurement is the appr opriate method to be used: 
24.2.1 as the Goods, Works or Services can be provi ded by only one 
supplier;…….” 
 
Staff Rule 110.1: Misconduct . “Failure by a staff member to comply with his or her 
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations , the Staff Regulations and the 
Staff Rules or other relevant administrative issuan ces, or to observe the standards of 
conduct expected of an international civil servant,  may amount to unsatisfactory 
conduct within the meaning of staff regulation 10.2 , leading to the institution of 
disciplinary measures for misconduct.” 
 
III. METHODOLOGY 
 
2. This investigation was conducted pursuant to Exe cutive Decision No 2003/16 on 
the establishment of the Investigation Task Force. The ITF investigators 
conducted an enquiry into the allegations raised by  conducting interviews with all 
relevant persons; obtaining documents from the Pris tina Airport administration 
and from the Pillar IV administration, which were t hen analysed for relevance to 
the inquiry at hand. 
 
IV. BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
 
3. Pristina International Airport constitutes a sta te owned enterprise under 
Yugoslavian law. The assets of the airport include the runways, terminal 
buildings, hanger, fuel storage facilities and equi pment. During the period 
covered by this investigation, from 2001 until 2003 , they were maintained by the 
Public Enterprise Airport Pristina, (PEAP) in coope ration with Military Units of the 
Kosovo Force (KFOR). Pursuant to United Nations Sec urity Council Resolution 
1244 dated 10 June 1999, and UNMIK Regulation No 1/ 1999 dated 25 July 1999. 
UNMIK is mandated to administer the territory of Ko sovo, including state owned 
and publicly owned assets. This includes Pristina I nternational Airport. 
 
4. Until the end of June 2002, responsibility for t he administration of the Pristina 
Airport was entrusted to the Civil Administration P illar (Pillar II) of UNMIK,  3 including Official 1 and Official 2 Department of T ransport and Infrastructure 
(DOTI) Official 1 was also involved in the matter. The DOTI was later known as 
the Transport Sector of the UNMIK Directorate of In frastructure Affairs. DOTI 
Official 1 left UNMIK at the end of June 2002. DOTI  Official 2 was recruited by 
DOTI as an international staff member on 31 July 20 00 in charge of airport 
operations, reporting to DOTI Official 1, and conti nued in this role until 30 
September 2001. Engineering expertise was provided by a series of engineers 
seconded from one UN member state’s Army, specifica lly Airport Engineer 1, 
Airport Engineer 2, and Airport Engineer 3, and lat er by a Consultant from the 
Consulting Company. 
 
5. On 1 July 2002, the responsibility for the admin istration of the Airport passed 
from Pillar II to the Kosovo Trust Agency (KTA) and  Pillar IV. The Divisional 
Manager was appointed. Under him/her were the PEAP Official and Official 3. 
 
6. On 1 April 2004 Pristina International Airport, which had until that time been 
under the jurisdiction of KFOR was handed over to c ivilian jurisdiction, under 
ICAO regulations. 
 
7. It is against this background of change that pro curement procedures relating to 
the following contract have been examined. 
 
V. INVESTIGATION DETAILS  
 
8. This investigation relates to two tenders for co ntracts for the purchase of winter 
and summer uniforms for staff members of Pristina A irport. The value of the 
contract for the purchase of winter uniforms was €1 57,060 and the contract for 
the purchase of summer uniforms was €24,997. 
 
Allegations 1 & 2 
 
(It is alleged that the highest bid received for th e winter uniforms was accepted, 
when it was almost twice the cost of the two furthe r bids received);  
and  
(It is alleged there was insufficient information o n the bid evaluation sheets as to why 
the offer from the third company was incomplete)  
 
9. A bid evaluation report dated 6 December 2002 in dicates that 8 firms were issued 
with documents and 4 bids were submitted. The bids were opened on 27 
November 2002. The report indicates at page 3 that Vendor 3’s offer in the sum 
of €157,060 was almost twice as much as the other t wo bids from Vendor 1 
(€80,198) and Vendor 2 (€86,850), which were reject ed.  
 
10. The reason specified for rejection of the bid b y Vendor 1 on page four of the 
evaluation was that the evaluation committee asked the company to produce a 
specimen of each type of uniform and it failed to d o so. This is confirmed in a 
letter to Vendor 1 dated 27 November 2002. A simila r letter was delivered to 
Vendor 3.  
 
11. The evaluation report also concluded that the c ompany Vendor 1 has one 
manufacturer in Peja, which can’t offer the require d quality and had too long a 
date for completion. 
  4 12. In the case of Vendor 2, the evaluation report states that the company provided 
an incomplete offer.  
 
13. When asked in what manner the offer was incompl ete in interview, the 
Procurement Officer, a member of the Evaluation Com mittee, stated that Vendor 
2 submitted an offer, which did not contain all the  required articles.  
 
14. The Procurement Officer was asked why his/her e xplanation was not put in the 
tender evaluation. He/she replied that it was due t o his/her lack of English. In 
view of the fact that the evaluation committee all signed the evaluation report, 
they would have been aware of the reason for Vendor  2’s rejection. 
 
15. The ITF contacted Vendor 2 and requested it to provide a copy of the tender 
documents in order verify whether or not its offer was incomplete. However, the 
company did not deliver any documents, or provide a ny information other than 
the name of the person who delivered the documents and samples for the tender 
to Pristina Airport. The ITF was therefore unable t o verify the Procurement 
Officer’s explanation. 
 
16. The explanation in the evaluation report that V endor 1 produced uniforms which 
were of lower quality, together with the explanatio n given by the Procurement 
Officer in interview that Vendor 2 submitted an off er which did not contain all the 
required articles, may account in part for the diff erence in price between the offer 
from Vendor 3 and the lower offers from Vendor 2 an d Vendor 1. However, the 
price difference is of concern. 
 
17. A letter of notification and a signed contract dated 6 December 2002 confirm that 
Vendor 3 was awarded the contract for the supply of  uniforms to administrative 
and maintenance personnel for the winter season.  
 
Allegation 3 
(It is alleged that the capital expenditure approva l for the winter uniforms contract 
was signed on 10 January 2003, after the contract a nd a letter of notification to the 
company had already been signed on 6 December 2002)  
 
18. A capital expenditure approval for the winter u niforms contract appears to have 
been signed by the Divisional Manager on 10 January  2003, after a letter of 
notification to the company and the contract had al ready been signed on 6 
December 2002. 
 
19. In view of the necessity to have expenditure au thorised prior to signature of a 
contract, the PEAP Official and the Divisional Mana ger were asked in interview 
why the contract appeared to be signed before the c apital expenditure had been 
approved. 
 
20. The PEAP Official indicated that although the c ontract was dated 6 December 
2004, the actual date of signature for the contract  was the protocol stamp on the 
contract, which was 14 January 2003.  
 
21. The Divisional Manager stated that there was no  date indicating when the 
contract was signed and added that the date on the contract would not 
necessarily correspond with the date on which the c ontract has been signed.  5 He/she added that the evidence was not conclusive t hat the contract had been 
signed before capital expenditure approval was obta ined. 
 
22. The Divisional Manager added that he/she assume d the protocol stamp date of 
14 January 2003 was the date that the contract was returned to the Airport. 
 
23. A better indicator as to the date on which the contract was signed is contained in 
a routing slip from the Procurement Officer to Offi cial 4 of Pillar IV, and the KTA 
Official dated 13 January 2003. The routing slip st ates “your signatures are 
required before we present the contract to the sele cted supplier.” This suggests 
that the contract may not have been signed until 13  January 2003, (i.e. after 
capital expenditure approval had been obtained.)  
 
Allegation 4 
(It is alleged that the value of the contract for s ummer uniforms was irregularly set at 
€3 below the limit requiring a competitive tender) 
 
24. On 3 April 2003 an invitation to quote for the supply of uniforms for the summer 
season was sent out to 4 companies, of which 3 subm itted quotes / bids by the 
deadline of 11 April 2003.  
 
25. The offers received were evaluated and Vendor 3  awarded the contract. A 
contract was signed by Vendor 3 on 12 April 2003 an d countersigned by the 
Divisional Manager on 18 April 2003.  
 
26. The offer received from Vendor 3 for the supply  of for summer uniforms (€24,997) 
was €3 below the maximum limit for competitive shop ping. This gives rise to 
concerns that the offer was set at a level to avoid  the necessity for a competitive 
tender.  
 
27. Whilst there is no evidence that this was delib erately done, a second offer was 
received from the company Vendor 2 in the sum of €3 9,541.00. In view of the fact 
that the evaluation report indicates that contract to be approximately €25,000 it is 
questionable as to whether a competitive tender sho uld have been held rather 
than competitive shopping. 
 
Allegation 5 
(It is alleged that the companies Vendor 1 and Vend or 2 were invited to tender for 
the summer uniforms contract when the evaluation re port for the winter uniforms 
indicated that Vendor 1 could not offer the quality  of uniforms required and Vendor 2 
produced an incomplete offer, thereby affording an advantage to the supplier of the 
winter uniforms, Vendor 3) 
 
28. The evaluation report and tender documents indi cate that two companies Vendor 
2 and Vendor 1 were requested to provide competitiv e bids, in spite of the fact 
that some five months earlier, Vendor 2’s previous offer for the winter uniforms 
had been rejected by the evaluation committee as in complete, as it had not 
included all the items requested; whilst Vendor 1’s  previous offer for the winter 
uniforms had been rejected on the basis that it had  one manufacturer in Peja 
which could not offer the required quality. 
 
29. The opinion of the winter uniforms evaluation c ommittee concerning Vendor 1 
was repeated in the findings of the summer uniforms  evaluation committee, which  6 was indicated by the Procurement Officer to have re jected Vendor 1’s offer on the 
grounds that its offer for the uniforms was not res ponsive from the cut and quality 
point of view. 
 
30. The grounds for the two rejections gave rise to  concerns that the inclusion of the 
two companies in the tender for summer uniforms may  have afforded an 
advantage to Vendor 3, the eventual winner. Having analysed the available 
evidence and carried out research into the two comp anies, the selection of 
Vendor 2 appears to have been justified in view of its size and reputation in the 
region, although doubts about the Vendor 1’s suitab ility to participate in the 
summer competitive shopping exercise remain. 
 
31. The Procurement Officer, a member of the evalua tion committee, stated in the 
course of his/her interview that the companies were  invited by one of the PEAP 
secretaries Secretary 1 or Secretary 2. 
 
32. The PEAP Official also indicated that the worke r who took delivery of the summer 
uniforms was Secretary 2. 
 
33. Due to Secretary 2’s possible connection with a nother more serious criminal 
case, involving alleged payments of money in return  for jobs at Pristina Airport, 
(ITF Case 0377/04) a decision was taken by the ITF not to interview Secretary 2 
concerning the choice of companies invited to submi t bids in the competitive 
shopping procedure, in order to avoid any possible prejudice to the more serious 
case.  
 
34. A decision was also taken not to interview Vend or 3 representative, concerning 
this case due to the fact that he/she was one of th e principal suspects in the 
same criminal case. 
 
35. Whilst there are some doubts as to the inclusio n of Vendor 1, the selection of 
Vendor 2 appears to have been justified in view of its size and reputation in the 
region. In view of this, the ITF does not find that  the competitive shopping 
procedure was organised in such a manner as to prov ide an unfair advantage to 
the existing supplier Vendor 3.  
 
Allegation 6 
(It is alleged that the invitations to quote for su mmer uniforms sent out to the 
companies contained differing quantities of items) 
 
36. The two invitations to quote for summer uniform s submitted by the companies 
Vendor 3 and Vendor 1 contain different quantities of items from that submitted 
by the company Vendor 2. Whilst it is accepted that  the price of the offer received 
from Vendor 2 was much higher than the other two, i t raised a question as to 
whether different quantities of items may have been  sent to competing 
companies.  
 
37. When asked about the differences in the quantit ies of items, the Procurement 
Officer stated that the quantities were changed and  revised documents sent out 
to all the companies before the deadline to submit the offers had ended. He/she 
added that the Airport, as the procuring entity had  the right to do so. In view of 
this response, the company Vendor 2 was not intervi ewed. 
  7 Allegation 7  
(It is alleged that two further small quantities of  uniforms in the sums of €792 and 
€1,188 were purchased without any supporting docume nts or justification) 
 
38. Two invoices dated 4 July 2003 and 5 August 200 3 indicate that two quantities of 
99 and 66 T-Shirts respectively were ordered with a  value of €1188 and €792 
respectively.  
 
39. When asked about these extra purchases, the PEA P Official stated that he/she 
assumed the Airport hired some students and tempora ry staff for three months 
and that the T-Shirts were for them to wear. The PE AP Official subsequently 
produced two written requests from the Security Off icial, for the two orders dated 
1 July 2003 and 1 August 2003. 
 
40. When asked why two orders were placed within on e month of one another, rather 
than together, the PEAP Official stated that the ai rport had run out of T-shirts and 
therefore purchased them from the same company in o rder to have the same 
design of T-shirt.  
 
41. This explanation is not a credible one, since i t suggests that the Airport did not 
have any idea as to the numbers of temporary staff being taken on over a period 
of only three months. If this was the case, it indi cates poor management. 
 
42. An alternative could be that two orders were pl aced to avoid having to organise a 
competitive bidding procedure, since the limit for single source procurements at 
that time was €1250.  
 
43. The Security Official was also interviewed by t he ITF in connection with the two 
orders for t-shirts dated 1 July 2003 and 1 August 2003. He/she initially stated 
that the t-shirts were purchased for 70 students hi red in the summer of 2003. 
However, he/she later added having re-read the docu ments that they were also 
purchased for approximately 30 workers as well. 
 
44.  Whilst the requests do indicate the t-shirts t o have been purchased for technical 
services workers and students, both appear to relat e to “physical workers”. In 
view of the fact that the Security Official stated earlier in his/her interview that 
each student would be allocated 3 shirts and one pa ir of trousers. The number of 
t-shirts ordered -99 and 66- does not correspond wi th the number of employees. 
 
45. In addition, the two requests specify that the shirts should be the same as the 
previous shirts of the existing workers. This requi rement suggests that Vendor 3, 
who had just won a tender for the provision of summ er uniforms to Pristina 
Airport in April 2003, had already been chosen as t he supplier. 
 
46. The Security Official stated that he/she had be en asked to write a request for 
uniforms by the Divisional Manager following a conv ersation between them on 
the need for uniforms for the student workers. When  asked why he/she had 
addressed the two requests to the PEAP Official rat her than the Divisional 
Manager, he/she replied that this was because the P EAP Official was his/her 
superior. However, neither of the requests mentions  that the Security Official has 
spoken to the Divisional Manager. 
  8 47. The Security Official also indicated in his/her  interview that he/she asked the 
Divisional Manager whether a company could be found  to supply the t-shirts as it 
would be longer and more expensive if a tender proc edure took place. When 
questioned further about this response, he/she late r added  
“It was not foreseen to have a tender procedure in connection with the shirts 
for students and the part time workers.” 
 
48. However, he/she could not recall who authorised  the purchase of the t-shirts 
without a tender procedure. In summary, evidence fr om the two memoranda 
requesting t-shirts and from the Security Official suggest that two orders were 
placed within the space of one month with the compa ny Vendor 3 in order to 
avoid having to organise a competitive bidding proc edure, since the limit for 
single source procurements at that time was €1250. The documents also suggest 
that the party who authorised the purchase was the PEAP Official.  
 
VI. CONCLUSIONS  
 
49. Whilst noting the comments in the capital expen diture approval that Vendor 3 
was the only company that can provide the quality o f uniforms needed within the 
time limit, it is of concern that Vendor 3’s offer for winter uniforms in the sum of 
€157,060 was almost twice as much as the other two bids from Vendor 1 
(€80,198) and Vendor 2 (€86,850). However, this may  in part be due to the fact 
that the Vendor 2 submitted an offer that did not c ontain all the required articles, 
whilst Vendor 1 produced uniforms of lower quality.  
 
50. The only original bid documents seen by the ITF  relating to the tender for the 
supply of uniforms to administrative and maintenanc e personnel for the winter 
season is the bid submitted by Vendor 3. Therefore,  the ITF is unable to verify 
the findings of the evaluation committee resulting in the rejection of the bids 
submitted by the two other companies. 
 
51. Evidence as to whether or not capital expenditu re was or was not obtained prior 
to signature of the contract is inconclusive, since  the date on the contract, (6 
December 2002) is contradicted by the routing slip dated 13 January 2003, which 
suggests that the letter of notification and contra ct may not have been signed 
until after 10 January 2003. The benefit of the dou bt must therefore be given to 
the Divisional Manager in this respect.  
 
52. The offer received from Vendor 3 for the supply  of for summer uniforms (€24,997) 
was €3 below the maximum limit for competitive shop ping of €25,000. This raises 
concerns as to whether a competitive tender should have been held rather than 
competitive shopping procedure. 
 
53. Whilst there are some doubts as to the quality of uniforms produced by Vendor 1, 
the selection of Vendor 2 appears to have been just ified in view of its size and 
reputation in the region. The ITF does not therefor e find that the competitive 
shopping procedure was organised in such a manner a s to provide an unfair 
advantage to the existing supplier Vendor 3. 
 
54. The evidence that companies submitting bids wer e irregularly requested to 
provide different quantities of items is not proven  in the light of the response 
given in interview by the Procurement Officer. 
  9 55. In spite of the explanation given by the PEAP O fficial, evidence from the Security 
Official indicates that the two small orders for T- shirts were placed at a value of 
€1188 and €792, in order to avoid having to organis e a competitive shopping 
procedure, since the limit for single source procur ements at that time was €1250. 
It is likely that this was a conscious decision and  constitutes a breach of Article 
24 of UNMIK Finance Administrative Instruction 1999 /2 on Public Procurement 
using Kosovo Consolidated Budget Funds. 
 
VII. RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
56. It is recommended that UNMIK Pillar IV take app ropriate action against PEAP 
Official based on the findings of this report. (IV0 4/275/01) 
 
57. It is recommended that UNMIK Pillar IV undertak e a review of the procedures for 
signing and dating contracts to ensure clarity as t o the date on which a contract is 
executed. (IV04/275/02) 
 
 
 