U N I T E D    N A T I O N  
           United Nations Interim 
           Administration Mission 
         in Kosovo  N A T I O N S    U N I E S 
Mission d’Administration 
Intérimaire des Nations 
     Unies au Kosovo 
 
UNMIK  
  
 Investigation Task Force 
 
 
Pristina, 22 November 2004 
 
Case 0278/04 
 
 
Pristina Airport - Alleged administrative irregular ity regarding an FIDS Tender  
 
Allegation 
 
An official of a non-Airport related company, suppo rted the procurement process for the supply 
of the Flat Information Display System (FIDS) by writi ng the recommendation and justification 
for a Single source procurement and also defined th e technical specifications. As Vendor 1 was 
only able to  supply but not to  cable the FIDS, another tender had to  be launched for the FIDS 
cabling. Winner of  this tender was Vendor 2. 
 
Background Information 
 
The Single Source Procurement (Purchase and supply of  FIDS) started on 17 October 2002  with a 
written recommendation and justification by Vendor 2 Representative.  The purchase of  
additional FIDS became necessary because of  the expansion of  the Passenger Terminal Building. 
The already existing system had been provided by Ve ndor 1, therefore the Airport Management 
decided to  choose Vendor 1 again. 
 
The Capital Expenditure Approval and contract were signed on 13 December 2002 . The 
procurement file does not show why Vendor 1 only de livered the FIDS but did not  cable it. The 
need for cabling the FIDS resulted in another tende r that commenced in March 2004 . According 
to the procurement file it appeared that Vendor 2 w on the Competitive Shopping tender with an 
amount of  15.919 Euro. 
 
Investigative details 
 
Although Vendor 2 Representative was never employed  by the Airport the procurement file for 
the FIDS supply contains two notes with regard to  recommendation and justification for the FIDS 
purchase dated both on 17 October 2002  and signed by Vendor 2 Representative. One note 
appears on white paper, the other one on Airport he aded notepaper. 
 
 
 
  2 
The interviews of Vendor 2 Representative were cond ucted on 31 August 2004 and 14 September 
2004. Vendor 2 Representative stated that he/she wa s probably asked by a PEAP Official to write 
a recommendation and justification note for the FID S purchase.  Vendor 2 at that time worked at 
the Airport for another project linked to the FIDS.  Vendor 2 was sub-contractor of Vendor 3 
working at the Expansion of the Terminal Building a nd observing the need for more FIDS. 
 
Vendor 2 Representative also stated that he/she wit h his/her company provided the Airport 
procurement office with technical specifications fo r the FIDS cabling on request by the PEAP 
Official. Vendor 2 Representative admitted that his /her involvement in the preparation of the 
FIDS supply and cabling procurements and the later participation in the FIDS cabling tender by 
his/her company put other competitors at a disadvan tage. To prepare technical specifications for a 
tender and to take part in the same was according t o Vendor 2 Representative common practice 
before the war. 
 
During his/her interview on 9 September 2004 the PE AP official gave contradictory statements 
with regard to his/her involvement in this case suc h as he/she probably had a meeting with 
Vendor 2 Representative and the PEAP Engineer to di scuss the FIDS supply and as one result 
Vendor 2 Representative wrote the appropriate recom mendation and justification note, but 
elsewhere he/she denied to have ordered Vendor 2 Re presentative to do so. 
 
The Airport Engineer was interviewed on 11 October 2004, as he/she is the responsible person to 
suggest new projects to the Airport Management. The  Airport Engineer stated that he/she was at 
no time involved in the FIDS purchase and did not r equest the support by Vendor 2 
Representative with regard to recommend and justify  the FIDS supply. The Airport Engineer only 
recommended the cabling of the FIDS in a note to th e Airport Management; all following 
procedures are under the responsibility of the proc urement unit and the management. 
 
The Sales Manager of Vendor 1 was interviewed on th e phone on 30 August 2004. Asked why 
Vendor 1 did not provide with the cabling of the FI DS he/she stated that Vendor 1’s management 
did not allow traveling to Kosovo at that time for security reasons. The Sales Manager of Vendor 
1 also mentioned that the Airport's contact person with regard to the FIDS cabling was 
for him/her Vendor 2 Representative. 
 
Conclusions 
 
Fact  is that Vendor 2 Representative was involved in the  procurement process for the FIDS 
supply and the FIDS cabling despite he/she was not an employee at the Airport or KTA 
procurement unit. The excuse by Vendor 2 Representa tive that such an involvement was common 
practice before the war has nowadays definitely los t its validity. 
 
It has to be assumed that Vendor 2 won the FIDS cab ling tender only due to the fact 
that the company was definitely in advantage with r egard to advanced knowledge of the 
technical requirements and had therefore sufficient  time to prepare a good bid in terms of the 
price. 
 
Although PEAP Official as the responsible official at that time denied that he/she had requested 
Vendor 2 Representative support for the FIDS supply  and cabling procurements, Vendor 2 
Representative granted the ITF that he/she acted on  PEAP Official’s request. 
  3 
Nevertheless, PEAP official bears the overall respo nsibility for his/her department (PEAP), and 
this investigation proved again that he/she did not  fully meet the requirements as manager in a 
sensitive area like the Airport. 
 
The entire matter has to be seen as an administrati ve irregularity. It is obvious that international 
procurement rules had been breached but the Procure ment Regulation that was in force at that 
time - Financial Agreement 1999/2 - does not indicate cases like described before. 
 
Furthermore, to prove a possible case of corruption , there are not enough indications. 
 
Recommendations 
 
It is recommended that UNMIK, and in particular, th e KTA undertake the following actions: 
Recommendation 1:  PEAP Official should be replaced  by a highly qualified manager whose 
skills meet international management standards. 
 
Recommendation 2:  The Airport staff responsible fo r procurement activity has to receive 
adequate training in the handling of procurement ma tters and to adhere to all applicable 
Procurement Regulations. 
 
Recommendation 3:  The Airport staff responsible fo r procurement activity has to ensure that all 
companies, consultancy agencies etc. providing supp ort in a procurement preparation is being 
excluded to take part in the tender concerned and i n all other tenders linked to the initial one. 
 