 1 UNITED NATIONS  
   United Nations Interim     
   Administration Mission  
in Kosovo   
 NATIONS UNIES  
Mission d’Administration 
Intérimaire des Nations    
       Unies au Kosovo  
 
UNMIK 
Investigation Task Force  
 
                                       
Case 287/04                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                   October 26, 2004                                      
 
 
Pristina Airport – Alleged administrative irregular ity regarding an X-RAY Tender  
 
 
Allegation 
On the 29 th  May 2003, the Divisional Manager, Kosovo Trust Age ncy (KTA) [UNMIK EU-
Pillar IV], approved and signed a contract between Pristina Airport and the Vendor before 
the Capital Expenditure was formally approved by KT A. 
 
Background Information 
 
On 7 March 2003, Pristina Airport launched an inter national tender to supply X-ray 
equipment. On 4 April 2003, the Evaluation Committe e awarded the contract to the Vendor, 
who had not submitted the lowest tender, but, was t he only company that met the rigorous 
technical specifications. The Vendor is acknowledge d as a world-class company specializing 
in such equipment.  
The contract between Pristina Airport and the Vendo r was concluded on 10 April 2003. It is 
not clear when the Vendor signed this document. The  KTA Internal Auditor 1 expressed 
concerns over the conclusion of the contract, which  resulted in the Divisional Manager 
signing on behalf of the Procuring Entity on 29 May  2003. KTA Official 1 also signed the 
contract, but did not record the date against his/h er name.  
The Capital Expenditure Approval, dated 19 June 200 3, was signed by KTA Official 2, on 20 
June 2003. 
 
Investigative details 
 
On 23 June 2004, ITF investigators interviewed the Divisional Manager, who explained that 
he/she believed he/she was authorized to sign the c ontract after having received the approval 
for the Capital Expenditure from the KTA.   2 Confronted with the documents that showed he/she ha d signed the X-Ray Contract with the 
Vendor before the Capital Expenditure request was a pproved by KTA, he/she stated that 
KTA probably gave him a verbal approval  
KTA Finance Official could neither confirm nor disp rove this claim as there is no evidence 
of the verbal approval being granted.  
The Divisional Manager also signed the Letter of Not ification to the Vendor (dated 10 April 
2003) on 29 May 2003 before KTA approved the Capita l Expenditure on 20 June 2003. It is 
not clear when the Letter of Notification was sent t o the Vendor; according to the Divisional 
Manager the Airport did not inform the company befo re the Capital Expenditure Approval 
was signed. 
ITF investigators have carefully studied the applic able law, such as the Finance 
Administration Instruction 1999/2 (UNMIK), Assembly of Kosovo – Law on Public 
Financial Management and Accountability 2003/2 and Assembly of Kosovo – Law on Public 
Procurement in Kosovo 2003/17 (initially foreseen t o be into force 9 June 2004, new date 1 
October 2004), and have spoken to KTA Finance Offic ial and KTA Internal Auditor 2 to 
clarify if the facts specified either breached the above regulations or internal KTA rules. No 
breaches of UNMIK Regulations or internal KTA rules were identified by KTA Finance 
Official or KTA Internal Auditor 2.  
 
Conclusions 
 
The fact that the Divisional Manager signed a Contr act and Letter of Notification before 
receiving the signed Capital Expenditure Approval f rom the KTA should be seen as a minor 
administrative irregularity, particularly since he/ she instructed KTA Official 1 by 
memorandum of 23 June 2003 (three days after KTA’s approval) to inform the supplier of 
the agreement of the contract.  
The ITF found no evidence of financial loss to the Pristina Airport or the KTA. 
 
Recommendations. 
 
This results of this investigation do not reach a l evel where recommendations for 
administrative action are necessary, however, it is  recommended that UNMIK, and in 
particular, the KTA undertake the following actions : 
Recommendation 1: That airport staff responsible fo r procurement activity have received 
adequate training in the handling of procurement ma tters: 
Recommendation 2: That airport staff responsible fo r procurement activity strictly adhere to 
all applicable Procurement Regulations; 
Recommendation 3: That airport and KTA staff author ized to sign contract documentation 
only do so after receiving written approvals on Cap ital Expenditures.     
 