ITF Report 262/04 1 U N I T E D    N A T I O N  
United Nations Interim  
Administration Mission in Kosovo  
  N A T I O N S    U N I E S 
Mission d’Administration Intérimaire 
des Nations Unies au Kosovo 
 
UNMIK  
  
 Investigation Task Force 
 
          16 August 2004  
 
REPORT ON ALLEGATIONS OF EVASION OF PRISTINA AIRPORT CHA RGES 
(ITF CASE NO.  0262/04) 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
 
1.  In July 2004, the Investigation Task Force (ITF) re ceived information alleging that 
Pristina Airport failed to collect all revenues for  landing, handling and passenger tax. 
The ITF was advised that the Airline, a regular use r of Pristina Airport, was not 
paying the correct landing charges and airport pass enger tax. The information 
indicated that the airline always paid its charges in cash. It was also alleged that there 
was also no record of any airport passenger tax bei ng paid for passengers departing 
with the airline. 
 
II. BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
 
2.  The Airline flies to Pristina Airport from a Europe an Airport every Thursday carrying 
Kosovar passengers who have been found to enter the  referred European state 
illegally. The Airline is contracted with the forei gn state’s Immigration Department. 
A representative of the Immigration Department and 25 or more “Securicor” security 
staff routinely escort the passengers on the flight s to Pristina.  
 
3.  On the return leg to the mentioned state, the Airli ne flight carries passengers from 
Pristina, consisting of the returning Securicor esc orts, the representative of 
Immigration, and in addition, a number of police of ficers of the concerned state 
currently working for UNMIK CIVPOL. These CIVPOL off icers travel to the UK 
without payment, but with the knowledge and approva l of both Airline and the U.K. 
Immigration Department.  
 
III. INVESTIGATIVE DETAILS 
 
4.  ITF Investigators obtained a number of documents fr om Pristina Airport officials 
including records of funds received from the Airlin e for the period January to June 
2004. These funds are broken down into handling, la nding, airport passenger, and 
departure tax. The schedule also lists the individu al Airport receipt number recorded 
for each cash payment. There was no record of the A irline having paid airport tax. 
 ITF Report 262/04 2 5.  ITF Investigators spoke to both Official 1 and Offi cial 2 of the Airline and requested 
copies of receipts issued by Pristina Airport in re spect of fees paid by the Airline to 
the airport, as well as the Aircraft "Load Sheets" for May and June 2004. These 
documents record details such as the weight of the aircraft including the MTOW 
(maximum take off weight). 
 
6.  Airline Official 1 explained that the Airline paid cash for handling and landing 
charges to the Pristina Airport Passenger Handling Services Department on each 
occasion his aircraft used the airport. Airline Off icial 1 explained that he/she had 
endeavored to open a credit account with Pristina A irport, but without success. 
 
7.  The ITF sought the assistance of the Security Offic er at Pristina Airport, in order to 
monitor Airline passenger movements. On 22 July 200 4, ITF Investigators monitored 
the Airline’s inward and outward flights and relate d airport activities. It was noted 
that whilst the arriving Kosovar passengers went th rough immigration procedures 
before entering into the arrivals lounge, the 25 se curity escorts and the representative 
of the related Immigration Department remained airs ide at all times awaiting 
instructions to return to the aircraft. They did no t enter the terminal building. 
 
8.  Other passengers departing with the Airline met in the Airport public lounge. Their 
identities were checked against a list provided by an UNMIK CIVPOL officer in 
consultation with the Immigration representative. T hey then went through 
conventional immigration and X-Ray searches and wer e escorted into the departure 
lounge before boarding the Airline aircraft. They d id not, however, pass through 
regular check-in procedures at any time.  
 
9.  ITF Investigators reviewed all paperwork relating t o this flight. An Official of the 
Passenger Handling Services, Pristina Airport, prov ided the receipt book used to 
evidence cash payments for landing, handling and ai rport passenger taxes. It was 
noted that other airlines, particularly those not v isiting Pristina on a regular basis, pay 
in cash for handling services.  
 
10.  Details shown on the records provided by Pristina A irport officials were reconciled 
with this receipt book. The dates, amounts and brea kdown of charges were confirmed. 
The pilot is required to sign the receipt book, and  the ITF verified the recorded 
signature against the Airline "Load Sheets" as genu ine. 
 
11.  The charges themselves, as calculated by the Airpor t Handling Services Department 
for Airline flights, were scrutinized against the p ublished "Price List for Basic Airport 
Services" issued on 1 January 2002. 
 
12.  Details recorded on the "Load Sheets" confirmed the  handling charge of 1074 Euros 
was also found to be correct. The landing charge of  €676.44 was, however, reduced 
by 50% as this flight was identified as a “humanita rian flight” and as such qualified 
for the discount. The Official of the Passenger Han dling Services, Pristina Airport 
told the ITF Investigators that she regarded the re turning Kosovars as refugees and the 
discount as appropriate. The ITF Investigators chec ked this matter with the Official of 
the Airport General Services, who confirmed he/she was aware of this discount and 
did not dispute this interpretation of the flight.  
 ITF Report 262/04 3 13.  ITF Investigators asked the Official of the Passeng er Handling Services, Pristina 
Airport to describe the airport tax obligations for  such flights. The Official stated that 
the tax of €15 per passenger is payable in respect of departing passengers only. The 
Official explained that this tax is normally collec ted by the airlines using the check-in 
facilities as part of normal boarding procedures. H e/She explained that the security 
guards and U.K. Immigration staff who remained airs ide awaiting return to the UK 
had not technically entered the Airport and as such  were not liable for airport taxes. In 
respect of the other departing passengers, the Offi cial said there was no obligation for 
the payment of this tax because neither the carrier  nor the passengers used the regular 
check-in facilities of the Airport.  
 
14.  The ITF reviewed the conventional check-in procedur es at the Pristina Airport and 
confirmed they complied with observations provided by the Senior Official of the 
Pristina Airport in response to a Management Letter  dated May 2004 on the 2003 
Financial Audit from auditing company. An extract o f the advice states the following: 
 
 ’53. Passenger Fees 
 OBSERVATION 
In the process of modernization of the Airport, Ent ity has acquired and implemented a 
so-called automatic checking system. This system pr ovides accurate evidence of 
passengers’ arriving and departure. However, PA has  still not integrated and/or 
connected the automatic checking system with financ ial reporting  
 
 54. Establishment of an integrated system could pr ovide efficient monitoring 
controls and accurate evidence, completeness and re conciliation of the number of 
passenger recorded by the automatic checking system  and the revenue from 
passenger fees in the financial statement. 
 
Management Comment : Full integration will be achieved by the new system .  At 
present, passenger and baggage check-in and boardin g is automatically connected to 
the load sheet.  The load sheet contains all releva nt facts concerning the flight, 
including type and quantity of passengers.  This re port is signed by Airport load 
control staff, compared to a head-count on board th e aircraft conducted by aircraft 
staff and is thereafter signed by the pilot before take-off.  A copy of this confirmed 
report is used as a basis for invoicing. We use the  information that later will be 
retrieved automatically by the new system.’  
 
15.  The possible loss of revenue of departing passenger  taxes is another matter requiring 
attention from airport management.  
 
IV. FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 
 
16.  There is no evidence that the Airline have sought t o avoid any charges levied by 
Pristina Airport. All charges levied upon the Airli ne by Pristina Airport for incoming 
and outgoing flights have been paid and receipts is sued. The charges applied to the 
Airline flights are in accordance with listed charg es for services.  
 
17.  The identification of the flight as "humanitarian" is a matter for closer review by 
Airport Pristina management to ensure compliance wi th airport charges. 
 ITF Report 262/04 4 18.  The recently appointed Senior Official of the Prist ina Airport, when advised by the 
ITF of the number of cash transactions, was unaware  that this practice continued 
within the Passenger Handling Services Department.  
 
19.  The information as to a credit arrangement for the Airline was also provided to the 
Pristina Airport Senior Official by the ITF for his /her action. 
 
20.  The charges shown in the "Price List for Basic Airpo rt Services" correspond with 
those charged to the Airline. In addition, the audi t trail in respect of the cash handling 
receipts, recording, and reconciliation with the ca shbooks and airport’s records 
showed no discrepancies.  
 
V. RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
21. Recommendation No. 1:   Airport Pristina management address the request o f the 
Airline to be granted conventional credit facilitie s without further delay 
(IV04/262/01); 
 
22. Recommendation No. 2:    The Official of the Airport General Services imm ediately 
review the reasons why cash transactions still occu r for standard services such as 
handling and landing, and endeavour to cease this p ractice where possible 
(IV04/262/02);  
 
23. Recommendation No. 3:  Airport Pristina Management Group review the matte rs 
raised in this report and provide a written respons e to the issues described herein to 
the Office for Coordination of Oversight of Publicly -Owned Enterprises 
(IV04/262/03). 