UNITED NATIONS  
United Nations Interim 
Administration Mission in Kosovo  
  
UNMIK NATIONS UNIES 
Mission d’Administration Intérimaire 
des Nations Unies au Kosovo  
Investigation Task Force 
 
Allegation of Possible Bribery at Pristina Airport (Case No. 0218/04) 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
1. On 29 April 2004 a Divisional Manager, UNMIK Pil lar IV, alleged that in October 
2002, an envelope containing €5200 was left in the office of an official of Public 
Enterprise Airport Pristina (PEAP), by an unidentif ied individual. On 4 October 
2002, a group of approximately 8 persons, including  a KTA Procurement 
Specialist and Company 1 representative, had attend ed a meeting in his office 
concerning a procurement contract for the building of a new car park at Pristina 
International Airport.  
 
II. APPLICABLE TERRITORIAL LAWS AND UNITED NATIONS 
PROCEDURAL RULES 
 
2. This case concerns an allegation of attempted br ibery and corruption as cited in 
Article 344 of the Provisional Criminal Code of Kos ovo. 
 
III. METHODOLOGY 
 
3. This investigation was conducted pursuant to Exe cutive Decision No 2003/16 on 
the establishment of the Investigation Task Force. (ITF) All relevant persons were 
interviewed and all relevant documentation was obta ined and reviewed. 
 
4. The KTA Procurement Specialist, who attended the  earlier meeting in the office 
of the PEAP Official, was interviewed concerning th e incident. The Company 1 
representative was not interviewed in this matter b y the ITF due to an ongoing 
criminal investigation in which he/she is a witness . The ITF did not wish to 
interfere in a judicial investigation.  
 
5. The ITF made contact with the Acting Commissione r of Police in Kosovo in order 
to ascertain the status of police enquiries into th e matter. 
 
 
IV. BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
 
6. On 29 April 2004, the Divisional Manager advised  the ITF of an incident which 
had occurred “sometime in October 2002”, which he/s he “thought” he/she had 
raised with the ITF previously. However, no evidenc e of this report could be 
located nor recalled by any members of the ITF. 
 
7. The Divisional Manager provided the ITF with a c opy of documents passed to an 
UNMIK police officer, on 11 October 2002 at UNMIK P olice in Fush, Kosovo, 
concerning the incident. 
  2 8. The documents consist of a letter from the Divis ional Manager to the UNMIK 
Police Officer dated 11 October 2002, and a file no te from the PEAP Official, 
dated 8 October 2002, to the Divisional Manager, de tailing the incident and 
annexing a list of serial numbers of Euro notes tot alling €5,200 alleged to have 
been left in the PEAP official’s diary in his offic e. . 
 
9. The Divisional Manager explained that he/she was  away from the Airport from the 
middle of September 2002 until the beginning of Oct ober 2002. Upon his/her 
return, he/she was visited in his office by the PEA P Official. The latter informed 
him/her that the previous Friday (believed to be 4 October 2002), a meeting had 
been held in his (the PEAP Official’s) office, with  persons bidding for the 
procurement contract for the new car parking area. 
 
10. The note dated 8 October 2002 from the PEAP Off icial, indicates that the persons 
who had attended a meeting were the Company 1 Repre sentative, an engineer 
from the contractor “escavator” and the KTA Procure ment Specialist. 
 
11. The following morning, the PEAP Official entere d his office and found an 
unmarked, partly sealed envelope in his/her diary t hat contained €5,200 in cash. 
The PEAP Official informed the Divisional Manager a bout the matter and 
confirmed that there was no accompanying note, or e xplanation for the cash 
being in his/her diary. 
 
12. The Divisional Manager then reported the incide nt to his/her then chain of 
command, and the matter was passed to the UNMIK pol ice. 
 
V. INVESTIGATION DETAILS  
 
13. Analysis of the note written by the PEAP Offici al suggests that the company 
referred to in his note as “escavator” is in fact C ompany 1, who won the contract 
for the construction of the new car park at Pristin a Airport and whose 
representative, attended a meeting in the PEAP Offi cial’s office one day prior to 
the discovery of the money. 
 
14. The sum of €5,200 alleged to have been left in the envelope is unusual, since 
one would expect the sum to have been a “round sum”  such as €5000. 
 
15. It should be noted that an interoffice memorandum f rom a former Airport 
Engineer to the KTA Procurement Specialist, dated 2 6 September 2002, alleged 
that the PEAP Official had accepted an open envelop e of documents relating to 
the car park tender from Company 2, after the time for submission of bids had 
concluded and contrary to accepted procurement proc edures on the handling of 
bids.   (This allegation is addressed in ITF Case No. 0274/ 04) 
 
16. The KTA Procurement Specialist told the ITF tha t a meeting had been held in the 
PEAP Official’s office with Company 1, attended by the Company 1 
Representative and a Company 1 engineer. The purpos e of the meeting had 
been to hand the contract for the new car park to C ompany 1 and the Company 1 
Representative to sign it. The KTA Procurement Spec ialist indicated that there 
were three or four other persons present, two of wh om, he/she thought may be 
two staff members of Pristina Airport.  The KTA Pro curement Specialist added 
that it was normal practice for the party winning t he bid to be invited to sign the 
contract in this way.  3  
17. The KTA Procurement Specialist also indicated t hat he/she did not see anything 
placed in the PEAP Official’s office or diary, alth ough he/she later heard about 
the incident. He/she expressed his/her opinion that  the incident had been 
arranged to “break up” the contract with Company 1,  but did not indicate by 
whom. 
 
18. The ITF reviewed the letter from the Divisional  Manager to the UNMIK Police 
Officer, which indicates that the matter was referr ed to the UNMIK police on 11 
October 2002. The letter also records that the sum of €5,200 was handed to the 
UNMIK Police Officer. 
 
19. The UNMIK Police Officer, who is now based in I raq, told the ITF that he/she 
served in Kosovo between June 2001 and November 200 2 and recalls the 
incident being reported. He/she stated that at that  time he/she was serving with 
the Border Police Investigations Unit and had assig ned this enquiry to his then 
supervisor. The latter was unable to be interviewed  as he/she had left the 
Mission. 
 
20. ITF investigators visited the Border Boundary P olice and interviewed two current 
investigators. Neither officer recalled the inciden t, but they made extensive 
enquiries in an attempt to trace the police report and locate the €5,200. They 
were unsuccessful on both counts. 
 
21. On 27 September 2004, the ITF sent a letter to UNMIK Police Officer 2, in an 
effort to determine what investigations had been un dertaken into the matter, the 
result of those investigations and the whereabouts of the money. 
 
22. The UNMIK Police Officer 2 indicated that Regio nal Crime Squad Pristina Region 
was undertaking an investigation into the matter, w hich therefore, remains an 
open investigation.  
 
23. The ITF then contacted the Regional Crime Squad  and meetings were held with 
two officials. 
 
24. The ITF obtained a draft of the assigned office r’s report into the case, which 
indicates that the case had been opened in 2004. Th e two-page report indicates 
that the assigned officer had interviewed the PEAP Official, who had indicated 
that he/she did not understand why the envelope wou ld have been left in his 
office, as he/she had no responsibility for the car  park contract. The PEAP Official 
also stated that he/she had contacted the Company 1  Representative, who 
denied any knowledge of the envelope. The report al so indicates that statements 
are to be taken from the Company 1 Representative a nd from the KTA 
Procurement Specialist.  
 
25. The Company 1 Representative was not interviewe d by the ITF due to his role as 
a witness in an ongoing police investigation and an y investigative activity by the 
ITF may have impacted upon that judicial inquiry. 
 
26. The ITF has also been informed that the €5,200,  which is the subject of the 
attempted bribery case, is still missing and a poli ce inquiry has commenced into 
its disappearance. 
   4 VI. FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
27.  Evidence adduced by the ITF gives rise to the possibility that an attempt was 
made to make a corrupt payment to the PEAP Official  in October 2002. 
Specifically, a sum of money was left in the diary of the PEAP Official in his office 
at Pristina Airport. The matter was correctly passe d to UNMIK police in October 
2002 and is currently under investigation.  
 
28. The €5,200, which is the subject of the attempt ed bribery case, is missing and an 
inquiry has been started into its disappearance. 
 
VII. CONCLUSIONS  
 
29. Evidence indicates that an attempt was made to make a corrupt payment to the 
PEAP Official. No evidence exists as to why or by w hom. 
 
30. The criminal case was passed to UNMIK police ov er two years ago and is 
currently under investigation. 
 
31. The ITF case is now closed in order to avoid an y duplication or interference of the 
judicial investigation. 
 
 