UNITED NATIONS 
United Nations Interim 
Administration Mission 
in Kosovo   
UNMIK NATIONS UNIES 
Mission d’Administration 
Intérimaire des Nations Unies 
au Kosovo  
 
INVESTIGATION TASK FORCE 
 
Allegation of fraud in handling and accounting of C argo  
at Pristina Airport (Case No. 0192/04)  
 
 
I. Introduction  
 
1. The Investigation Task Force (ITF) received a re port that the Cargo Department at 
Pristina Airport had improperly sought payment for importation and storage of goods 
owned by the Company. It was further alleged that a n amount of €8,000.00 was sought 
and received by an official (Official 1) of the Pri stina Airport, which was illegal and 
therefore not recorded in the accounts of the Airpo rt. 
 
2. After the ITF conducted a preliminary investigat ion into this allegation, prima 
facie  evidence of a crime was identified and the case wa s referred to the Department of 
Justice, Pillar I, UNMIK, on July 22 nd , 2004 for further judicial action. This report is a 
summary of the information adduced during the inves tigation. 
 
 
II. Background  
 
3. ITF Investigators met with the Company Represent ative, who explained that a 
part of his business involves the importation and m arketing of LED display equipment. 
The Company consists of 4 partners: 
 
• Partner 1 
• Partner 2 
• Partner 3 
• Partner 4 
 
4. The above company partners agreed to the followi ng regarding the various 
payments to be effected as follows: 
 
• Partner 2 and Partner 3 were to pay the total price  of all the goods; 
• Partner 1 was to pay everything regarding VAT, Cust om Duties, Local Taxes and 
Storage.     
III. THE DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF  
AIRPORT PRISTINA CARGO OFFICIALS 
 
5. In general terms, airport officials are required  to act in the best interests of Airport 
Pristina, a Kosovo Publicly Owned Enterprise (POE),  while performing their duties and 
establishing and maintaining a responsible and tran sparent business framework in which 
Airport Pristina can function. All Cargo Department  officials are obliged to follow the 
applicable law, and internal Rules, Regulations and  Instructions, when dealing with 
Airport Pristina assets, resources and facilities. 
  
 6. Official 2 was responsible for the daily control  and management of the Cargo 
section, including its assets and resources. He had  the responsibility to ensure that all 
contracts concluded on behalf of Airport Pristina r egarding storage fees payable by 
importers complied with the applicable law, regulat ions and instructions, and that they 
were subject to full and fair competition, openness  and transparency and free from 
conflict of interest and corruption. His/her duty w as to conduct the affairs of Airport 
Pristina as a senior official with the utmost integ rity and transparency and to be fully 
accountable to the Board of Airport Pristina. 
 
7. It was Official 2’s responsibility to ensure tha t storage fees were paid and a record 
of the payments be kept. The procedure for recordin g payments is that the airway bill 
with a customs stamp should have been provided to t he Finance Officer whereby he/she 
then calculates the storage fees owed. Before indiv iduals or companies were allowed to 
retrieve their goods, this fee had to be paid pursu ant to an official invoice. In this instant 
case, there is no record of such an invoice or any such payment. The absence of such a 
record is highly unusual and establishes that monie s owed to the airport were not received 
in this case. 
 
8. Official 1  worked in the Cargo Handling Office at the Airport.  As with Official 2, 
it was Official 1’s duty to ensure that all payment s made by customers of the airport 
complied with the applicable regulations and instru ctions. 
    
 
III. INVESTIGATIVE DETAILS 
 
9. A consignment of “LED Display equipment and acce ssories” for the Company 
arrived at the airport via Airline 1 on 26 December  2003, and consisted of four pallets 
containing 27 packages with a total weight of 976 k g. These goods were imported from 
Beirut and were accompanied by an Air Waybill. 
 
10. The Company Representative was advised by Partn er 2 of the consignment’s 
arrival. Partner 2 was also the person that handed over the Air Waybill to the Company 
Representative. 
 11. At the time the consignment arrived in Kosovo, the Company did not have 
permission to erect the LED screen on any city buil ding for advertisement purposes as 
they had intended. This authorization was granted s ometime later, circa March/April 
2004. 
 
12. The merchandise in question was paid for and cl eared on the 15 th  of March 2004, 
by the nominated Shipping Agent. The same Agent, on  behalf of the Company, paid a 
total amount of €11,581.00, VAT and Customs Duties included. 
 
13. Once all the payments had been effected, the Co mpany Representative went to the 
Cargo Building to pick up his goods, but according to his statements, he/she was 
approached by Official 1, who advised the Company R epresentative that he/she was now 
required to pay the amount of €32,800.00 that inclu ded a storage charge for the period 26 
December 2003 to 15 March 2004. 
 
14. Partner 2 was astonished at this excessive char ge for storage. At this point, the 
Company management agreed to leave the goods in sto rage and decide on what action to 
take. They identified the possibility of returning the goods to their place of origin, due to 
the fact that the storage would have cost them near ly as much as the price of the screen 
(US$54,000.00).  
 
15. Official 1 then advised the Company Representat ive that he would do everything 
in his/her power to assist in settling this situati on, including an offer to lower the storage 
charge. Sometime thereafter, Official 1 advised the  Company Representative that he/she 
was able to decrease the storage charge to €8,000.0 0 based on his/her position and 
connections at the Airport. 
 
16. The Company management accepted the new offer a nd agreed to pay the lower 
storage charge of €8.000.00. However, due to the fa ct that Partner 1 did not have 
€8,000.00 in cash, he/she commenced a search amongs t his/her friends for the money. 
Subsequently, Partner 1 was able to raise the money  to pay both the Custom Excise and 
Airport Storage fees.  
 
17. On the 16 th  of March 2004, Partner 1 paid the €8,000.00 to the  Company 
Representative, who then went to Pristina Airport t o hand it to Official 1. The Company 
Representative stated that the hand-over of the cas h to Official 1 took place outside the 
airport terminal gate.  The Airport X-Ray Operator,  who observed the meeting between 
the two men, corroborated the fact that the meeting  took place as stated. 
 
18. ITF Investigators visited the Cargo Department Finance Office to check official 
documentation in relation to the Company merchandis e. No trace of the payment of the 
€8,000 could be found in the Cargo Department accou nt books for 2003 or 2004. 
 19. According to the tariff list that the Finance O fficer of the Cargo Section provided 
to the ITF, the Company should have paid an amount of approximately €32,000.00 for 
storage fees from the 23 rd  of December 2003 to 15 th  of March 2004. 
 
20. In view of the above, ITF Investigators intervi ewed Official 2 who offered no 
justifiable explanation as to why no payment had be en effected with respect to the 
Company goods. He/she simply repeated that the good s were confiscated from the 
Customs Service and that just a minor payment of st orage fees should have occurred. 
Unfortunately, no trace of payment (current officia l storage price list payment or the 
minor payment that Official 2 declared in his/her o fficial interview) was detected by the 
ITF nor provided by Official 2. Further inquiries c arried out by the ITF on 6 July 2004 at 
Pristina Airport Customs Offices and at Pristina Cu stoms Services Headquarters, 
disclosed that the merchandise did indeed enter the  airport storage on 26 December 2003 
and left on 15 March 2004. According to two staff m embers, the Company merchandise 
was not confiscated based on a request from Customs . The ITF found that the Company 
paid a total amount of €11,581.00 for VAT and Custo ms Duties.   
 
21. On July 12 th  2004, ITF Investigators interviewed Partner 4 conf irmed that the first 
requested amount was €32,000.00, which was later ch anged to the agreed sum of 
€8,000.00. He/she added that he/she received a stra nge phone call from a staff member of 
Airline 2 Pristina Office on 9 July 2004, advising him/her to urgently make contact with 
Official 2 on his/her mobile telephone, because Off icial 2 urgently needed to speak with 
Partner 4. According to Partner 4’s statement, he/s he called Official 2, who asked for an 
appointment in order to discuss “a certain issue”. Partner 4 said he/she replied that there 
was no need to continue this conversation, as he/sh e knew that Official 2 was trying to 
influence any statements by Partner 4 that he/she m ay provide to any future inquiries 
from an investigative body. Partner 4 stated to the  ITF that he/she advised the staff 
member of Airline 2 of his already scheduled appoin tment with ITF Investigators on the 
following Monday and that he/she was prepared to te ll all he knew on the matter.  In view 
of all the collected data and evidence, the ITF dec ided to refer the case to the Department 
of Justice.  
 
IV. CRIMINAL VIOLATIONS 
 
22. Based on the referral from the ITF to the Depar tment of Justice on 26 July 2004, 
arrest warrants were  issued against Official 1 and Official 2. Each char ge is detailed 
below: 
  
Count 1   
 
That between the dates 14 th  March 2004 and 16 th  March 2004 inclusive, Official 1 and 
Official 2  acting in their capacity as officials of Airport Pr istina, and acting in complicity 
with the intention to obtain an unlawful material b enefit, presented a representative of the 
Company with a false statement of account claiming reduced storage fees, and in so 
doing, misled an authorized person to carry out an unlawful payment, thereby committing the offence of Fraud in Service  in violation of  Article 215, (1) and (2) of the Ko sovo 
Criminal Code (KCC) punishable by imprisonment of o ne to ten years 
 
{equivalent to Fraud in Office  contrary to Article 341 (1) and (2) of Provisional Kosovo 
Criminal Code (PCCK)}; 
 
and Complicity, in violation of Article 22 of Criminal Code of SFRY ,( equivalent to   Co-
Perpetration , in violation of PCCK Article 23) 
 
Count 2   
 
That between the dates 14 th  March 2004 and 16 th  March 2004 inclusive Official 1 and 
Official 2 with the intent to obtain an unlawful ma terial benefit for themselves 
appropriated money (approx. 8,000.00 Euros) from th e Company, amount which was 
allegedly decreased from an initial sum of 32,800.0 0 Euros to be paid to the Airport for 
storage fees for goods kept in the Cargo section of  the Airport from 24.12.03 until 
15.3.2004, thereby committing the offence of Embezzlement , in violation of Article 219 
para. 1 and 3 of the KCC punishable by imprisonment  of one to ten years 
 
(equivalent to Misappropriation in Office , in violation of Article 340, (1) and (3) of the 
PCCK) 
 
and  Complicity, in violation of Article 22 of Criminal Code of SFRY  ( equivalent Co -
Perpetration , in violation of PCCK Article 23.) 
 
 
Count 3  
 
That between the dates 14 th  March 2004 and 16 th  March 2004 inclusive Official 1 and 
Official 2 acting in complicity, with the intention  to inflict damage to a business 
organization, abused their official position and ex ceeded the limits of their authorization 
and did not execute their official duties, by faili ng to collect, on behalf of their employer, 
the appropriate storage fee from the Company , and depriving the airport of that amount , 
thereby  committing the criminal offence of Abusing Official Position of Authority  in 
violation of Article 339 para. 1 and 3 of PCCK, pun ishable by imprisonment of one to 
eight years   
 (equivalent to Abuse of Office  in violation of Article 210 (1) and (3) 
 
and  Co-Perpetration , in violation of PCCK Article 23. 
 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
23. Given that the judicial process is ongoing and now rests with the Department of 
Justice, it is highly recommended that the informat ion contained in this report be 
carefully protected from inappropriate disclosure. The two Pristina Airport staff members 
are under suspension and awaiting trial. Therefore,  this information is to be treated as highly confidential and should not be disseminated to any other party without the consent 
of the competent Judicial Authorities.  
VI. RECOMMENDATIONS 
24. The ITF offers the following recommendations: 
Recommendation 1 : The ITF recommends that UNMIK Pillar IV take no ad ministrative 
action against Official 1 and Official 2 pending th e resolution of their respective cases by 
the Department of Justice (IV04/192/01). 
Recommendation 2 :  The ITF recommends that UNMIK Pillar IV take appr opriate 
disciplinary action against Official 1 if he/she is  not criminally charged or sentenced by 
the competent authorities (IV04/192/02). 
Recommendation 3 : The ITF recommends that UNMIK Pillar IV take appro priate 
disciplinary action against Official 2 if he/she is  not criminally charged or sentenced by 
the competent authorities (IV04/192/03). 
 
 
 