 1 -3 UNITED NATIONS 
United Nations Interim 
Administration Mission in 
Kosovo 
  
UNMIK NATIONS UNIES 
Mission d’Administration 
Intérimaire des Nations Unies 
au Kosovo  
Investigation Task Force 
 
Alleged Irregularities Related to an UNMIK Bank Acc ount 1110019243020132-1  
(Case No. 0221/04)  
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
1. The Investigation Task Force (ITF) Kosovo conducted  an investigation into 
the circumstances surrounding a UNMIK Bank Account opened at a Bank in 
Pristina. This investigation was triggered by a for ensic audit report of Public 
Enterprise Airport Pristina (PEAP) released in Febr uary 2003 by the 
Chartered Accountants.  
 
2. The activities of the Pristina Airport fall under t he control of the Kosovo Trust 
Agency (KTA) and UNMIK Pillar IV, which is administ ered by the European 
Union. Investigations into allegations of fraud and  corruption involving 
UNMIK, its pillars and other organizational structu res as well as the 
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government (PISG) and independent bodies 
and offices established pursuant to the Constitutio nal Framework for 
Provisional Self-Government in Kosovo fall within t he purview of ITF as laid 
out by the Executive Decision on the Establishment of the Investigation Task 
Force UNMIK/ED/2003/16, dated 21 October 2003. 
 
II.  APPLICABLE TERRITORIAL LAWS:  
 
3. Pursuant to the authority given to The Special Repr esentative of the 
Secretary-General, under United Nations Security Co uncil resolution 1244 
(1999)  of 10 June 1999, taking into account United Nation s Interim 
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) Regulation No. 1999/ 1 of 25 July 
1999 on the Authority of the Interim Administration  in Kosovo, for the 
purpose of defining the law applicable in Kosovo, t he SRSG promulgated that 
the law applicable in Kosovo shall be: 
 
a. The regulations promulgated by the Special Represen tative of the 
Secretary-General and subsidiary instruments issued  thereunder; and  
b. The law in force in Kosovo on 22 March 1989. 
 
4. The ITF Investigators considered possible breaches of the Provisional 
Criminal Code of Kosovo , especially Article 339 (Abusing Official Position  of 
Authority); Article 340 (Misappropriation in Office ) and Article 341 (Fraud in 
Office).  
  2 -3 III.  BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
 
5. The DCDM Audit Report 2002/3 highlighted a possible  problem with a 
UNMIK Bank Account, which has been termed the “Comp any Account”. It 
was alleged that there was only one signatory to th is account (Staff Member 1) 
and that the interest from this account was going t o an unidentified private 
account.  
 
IV.  INVESTIGATIVE DETAILS 
 
6. The ITF Investigators established that on 13 and 20  July 2001, UNMIK and the 
Company signed a contract “Relating to the Supply of Aviation Fuel and the 
Refuelling of Commercial Civilian Aircraft at Prist ina Airport ”. As of 03 March 
2004, this Contract was amended, so that the Compan y also commenced 
supplying aviation fuel and refuelling services to military and non-
commercial aircrafts. 
 
7. Based on this contract, the Company has been making  payments to UNMIK 
that are being deposited to an UNMIK Bank Subject A ccount, opened at a 
Bank in Pristina. This is a sub-account of the main  UNMIK Bank Account. 
 
8. The Bank Account was opened with the Bank on 11 Oct ober 2001 and the first 
payment was made by way of an incoming Internationa l Money Transfer 
(IMT) in the sum of € 45,105.23 on 17 April 2002. T he most recent payment 
made to this account was made on 24 January 2005 by  the Company in the 
sum of € 8,578.42. The actual balance on this bank account as of 04 March 2005 
is € 537,536.90. 
 
9. Initially Staff Member 1, was the “A” signatory of this account. On 14 July 
2004, his/her Supervisor, formally notified Staff M ember 2, that he/she was 
an “A” signatory to this account with Staff Member 3 and Staff Member 4  
being “B” signatories. Staff Member 2 was also noti fied that withdrawals from 
this account could not be made without the joint ap proval of either the 
Supervisor, Staff Member 5 or Staff Member 6. Staff  Member 2 was also 
informed that the Account was currently an UNMIK Ba nk Account and that 
Pristina Airport did not have full control over the  use of this account.  
 
10. The ITF Investigators found no evidence that funds deposited in this UNMIK 
Bank Account were generated by illegal activities. In fact this investigation 
confirmed that all funds deposited on this account were generated by a 
legitimate business sanctioned by a contract betwee n UNMIK and the 
Company.  
 
11. The allegation that had been made by the Chartered Accountants - “interest 
from this account was going to an unidentified priv ate account ” was found to be 
without merit, given that the terms and conditions this UNMIK Bank Account 
does not generate any interest.  The ITF Investigat ors further established that 
there were no withdrawals from this Account; the on ly debits were a variety 
of bank charges.   3 -3  
12. The ITF Investigation identified a long running dis pute related to the legal 
ownership of the money deposited to this UNMIK Bank  Account. The funds 
deposited to this account are being generated exclu sively from the Pristina 
Airport through a contract between UNMIK and Air BP . Despite numerous 
inquiries that have been made by the Pristina Airpo rt General Services 
Department, no definitive answer has been provided as to who is the owner 
of this money. As a result, a sum of € 537,536.90 i s “sitting” in this UNMIK 
Account and it does not generate any interest payme nts. It should be noted 
that the Pristina Airport now has to borrow money t o run its day-to-day 
operations. This situation would suggest that the U NMIK Senior 
Management team should resolve the legal ownership question as soon as 
possible.  
 
V.  CONCLUSIONS  
 
13. The investigation conducted by the ITF established that allegations made by 
the Chartered Accountants in their Audit Report 200 2/3 related to the 
UNMIK Bank Subject Account were without merit. The ITF investigation 
clearly proved that the funds deposited on this Sub ject UNMIK Bank Account 
were generated by a legitimate business sanctioned by a valid contract 
between UNMIK and the Air BP. None of the deposited  money has been 
withdrawn and the only debits to this account were a variety of bank charges.  
 
14. The ITF did not find evidence that would indicate a ny illegalities related to 
this UNMIK Bank Account. Staff Member 1 was an “A” signatory to this 
Account as well to a number of other UNMIK Bank Acc ounts. Upon his/her 
departure from Kosovo, the right of ”A” signatory f or this account (and other 
UNMIK Bank Accounts) was formally transferred to ot her authorised 
individuals. 
 
15. The ITF Investigation identified a long lasting pro blem related to legal 
ownership of the funds deposited in this UNMIK Bank  Account that should 
be addressed and resolved as soon as possible.   
 
VI.  RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
Recommendation 01 : UNMIK Pillar 4 – KTA should, without any further 
delay, resolve the dispute over the legal ownership  of the Subject UNMIK Bank 
Account. (IV04/221/01). 
 
Recommendation 02 : UNMIK Pillar 4 – KTA should explore the possibility  to 
deposit funds that are currently in the Subject UNM IK Bank Account to a 
different account that would generate interest or u se the funds for other 
legitimate UNMIK operations. (IV04/221/02) 
 