 
 
This report is protected under the provisions of 
ST/SGB/273, paragraph 18, of 7 September 1994  
 
 
 
 
 
U N I T E D   N A T I O N S 
 
 
 
Office of Internal Oversight Services 
Investigations Division 
 
 
 
 
 
REDACTED 
REPORT OF INVESTIGATION 
 
ID CASE NO. 0425/04 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
07 February 2006  
 
 
 STRICTLY  CONFIDENTIAL    1  ALLEGATIONS OF MISMANAGEMENT AND WASTE OF RESOURCES  BY 
THE OFFICER OF THE UNMIL FUEL CELL 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
1. During an assessment mission to the United Nation s Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), 
Investigators of the Investigations Division of the  Office of Internal Oversight Services 
(ID/OIOS) received information that Officer 1, form erly with the UNMIL Fuel Cell, was 
unable to account for US$500,000 in fuel expenses f or the month of February 2004. At 
the time, no further details were provided to ID/OI OS regarding how the complainant 
was aware of the fact that the Fuel Cell was unable  to account for the US$500,000, nor in 
what way Officer 1 was involved with the matter. 
 
2. As a result of the investigation by ID/OIOS into  the allegation against Officer 1, it 
was determined that although it was true that an au dit by Internal Audit Division 1 of 
OIOS (IAD1/OIOS) had discovered that, for the perio d 1 August 2003 to 31 March 2004, 
290,066 gallons of fuel (valued at US$455,404) coul d not be accounted for by UNMIL, 
there was no evidence suggesting that Officer 1 was  personally responsible for the 
discrepancy. 
 
 
II.   BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
 
3. UNMIL was established on 19 September 2003 by Sec urity Council Resolution 
1509. Officer 1 was responsible for establishing th e UNMIL Fuel Cell at the start of the 
mission, having previously served as an Officer wit h the Mission des Nations Unies au 
République Démocratique de Congo (MONUC). During th e time he served as an officer 
of the UNMIL Fuel Cell, the unit consisted of himsel f and 20 other staff members (four 
International staff and the remainder National staff ). Officer 1 left UNMIL and the 
United Nations on 30 June 2004. His replacement, Off icer 2, took over the post on 8 July 
2004. 
 
4. In January and February 2004 an audit of “Fuel M anagement in UNMIL” 
(Reference AP2004/626/05) was conducted by IAD1/OIO S. 
 
 
III.   APPLICABLE LEGAL NORMS 
 
Staff Regulation 1.2  
 
(b): “Staff members shall uphold the highest standards of … integrity. The concept of 
integrity includes … impartiality, fairness, honest y … in all matters affecting their work 
and status.”  
   2  (q): “Staff members shall use the property and assets o f the Organization only for official 
purposes and shall exercise reasonable care when ut ilizing such property and assets” 
 
ST/IC/1996/29  
 
Mismanagement  
 
“(i) Any unreasonable failure of a staff member to perform efficiently, competently and 
with the best interests of the Organization in mind , all assigned tasks, duties and 
management responsibilities in connection with Unit ed Nations programmes and its 
operations” 
 
Waste of resources  
 
“(i) Any unreasonable failure to ensure that the mo netary or other resources of the 
Organization are used solely, efficiently and effec tively for the purposes of the 
Organization or for its benefit; 
 
(ii) Any unreasonable act or failure to act, which,  as a direct result of a failure to 
exercise due care, causes loss to the Organization”  
 
 
IV.   METHODOLOGY 
 
5. ID/OIOS conducted interviews with all parties co ncerned, other than Officer 1 
himself, and reviewed all relevant documentation. 
 
 
V.   INVESTIGATIVE DETAILS 
 
IAD1/OIOS Audit AP2004/626/05 “Fuel Management in U NMIL”  
 
6.  Prior to travelling to Liberia to investigate t he allegations against Officer 1, 
ID/OIOS reviewed the IAD1/OIOS audit report. Amongs t other matters raised in the 
report, IAD1/OIOS noted that, for the period 1 Augu st 2003 to 31 March 2004, 290,066 
gallons of fuel (valued at US$455,404) could not be  accounted for. The Auditors noted 
that there had been an investigation by UNMIL’s Spec ial Investigation Unit (SIU) into 
allegations that UNMIL fuel was being sold by bowser  drivers to third parties and that 
the investigation had concluded that there was cred ible evidence against some of the 
bowser drivers and their supervisor. As a result of  the investigation, the supervisor and 
the drivers involved were dismissed. Since the supe rvisor in question was the one 
responsible for the monitoring of deliveries and th e completion of bowser log sheets, 
IAD1/OIOS concluded that “irregularities in the dis tribution” could account for the 
290,066-gallon discrepancy. 
   3  7. The IAD/OIOS Auditors made a total of 17 recomme ndations to UNMIL 
regarding the way that the mission managed fuel. Th e mission accepted all but one of the 
recommendations (this recommendation was subsequent ly withdrawn by IAD-1/OIOS) 
and has implemented them. 
 
SIU Investigation SIU/MON/0090/04  
 
8. Upon receipt of information on 13 March 2004 tha t UNMIL bowser drivers were 
selling UNMIL fuel to local vendors in Monrovia and other parts of Liberia, the SIU 
initiated an investigation into the allegations. Th e SIU investigation revealed that some 
locally hired drivers, employed to deliver fuel to various UNMIL installations, were 
selling a portion of the fuel they were transportin g to local vendors. The SIU found that 
the theft and sale of UNMIL fuel was organised by t he drivers’ supervisor and that it had 
begun soon after the mission commenced in 2003. As a result of the investigation, the 
supervisor and the drivers identified by the SIU we re dismissed. There was no evidence 
disclosed during the SIU investigation to suggest t hat Officer 1 was in any way involved 
in the theft and subsequent re-sale of the fuel. 
 
ID/OIOS Investigation  
 
9. The original complainant in the case was intervi ewed by ID/OIOS. He stated that 
he had no personal knowledge of either the problems  with the Fuel Cell accounts or of 
any involvement of Officer 1 in the problems identi fied. He claimed that he had become 
aware, as a result of his position in the mission, that an audit was being conducted into 
the Fuel Cell accounts and that an amount of approx imately US$500,000 could not be 
accounted for. This was the information that he had  communicated to ID/OIOS, along 
with the fact that Officer 1 was an Officer of the Fuel Cell at the time. The complainant 
was unable to provide any further information to ID /OIOS about the matter under 
investigation. 
 
10. The current situation regarding the UNMIL Fuel C ell and fuel management 
within UNMIL has been investigated under ID/OIOS Cas e 0430/04 and was not revisited 
during this investigation. 
 
 
VI.  FINDINGS 
 
11. The original complainant, when re-interviewed b y ID/OIOS, was not able to 
provide any concrete evidence to suggest that Offic er 1 was in any way responsible for 
the US$500,000 discrepancy in the Fuel Cell account s. Indeed, he stated that he had 
never mentioned the exact amount involved and that Officer 1’s name had only come up 
because Officer 1 was the Officer of the Fuel Cell at the time. 
 
12. Officer 1 is no longer with the United Nations and therefore no longer falls under 
the authority of OIOS. 
   4  13.  The discrepancy mentioned to ID/OIOS by the co mplainant did exist but it had 
already been noted by the IAD-1/OIOS Auditors who, in their final report, suggested that 
the missing fuel could most probably be attributed to the actions of the former fuel 
supervisor and the bowser drivers. These persons we re dismissed from the mission once 
their actions became known. 
 
14. UNMIL has acted on the recommendations of the IA D/OIOS Auditors and, as 
demonstrated by the results of the investigation in to ID/OIOS Case 0430/04, the situation 
regarding fuel management in the mission is much im proved. 
 
 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
 
15. The evidence as disclosed during this investiga tion demonstrates that the 
allegations against Officer 1 cannot be substantiat ed. 
 
 
VIII.   RECOMMENDATION 
 
16. In view of the findings of this investigation: 
 
Recommendation 1 : It is recommended that DPKO record this case as u nsubstantiated, 
and that Officer 1 is advised that he is cleared of  any wrongdoing as to these allegations. 
(ID Rec. No. IV04/425/01) 
 
----- 
 
 