 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNITED NATIONS                                           
NATIONS UNIES 
 
This report is protected under the provisions of 
ST/SGB/273, paragraph 18, of 7 September 1994" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OFFICE OF INTERNAL OVERSIGHT SERVICES 
INVESTIGATIONS DIVISION 
 
 
 
 
REDACTED 
REPORT OF INVESTIGATION 
 
 
ID CASE NO. 0050/05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 March 2005 
 
 
 
 STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL   1 Report of Investigation – ID Case 0050/05  
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
 
1. On 13 February 2005, the Investigations Division  of the Office of Internal 
Oversight Services (ID/OIOS) received a request fro m UNON Official 1 to inquire 
into allegations that locally recruited United Nati ons Office at Nairobi (UNON) staff 
may have engaged in improper conduct by submitting fraudulent letters of 
appointments showing longer contract duration dates  to obtain loans from the United 
Nations Co-operative Savings and Credit Society Lim ited (UN-SACCO), which 
operates within UNON premises.    
 
2. The request was prompted by an earlier report su bmitted to UNON 
Management by UNON Official 2, on a scheme whereby locally recruited staff 
members from the Nairobi-based United Nations Child ren’s Fund/Somalia Support 
Centre (UNICEF/Somalia) obtained UN-SACCO loans by submitting fraudulent 
letters of appointments to UN-SACCO. The primary co ncern of UNON Management 
was that a similar fraudulent scheme might have spr ead to UNON and other Nairobi-
based United Nations Agencies.    
 
3. At the time of the request, two ID/OIOS Investig ators were on mission to 
Nairobi on another matter, but given the concerns e xpressed by UNON Managers, the 
ID/OIOS Investigators were directed by ID/OIOS Mana gement to look into this 
matter with celerity, and did so, from 14 through 1 8 February 2005.  
 
4. The purpose of this report is to present the fin dings of the preliminary 
ID/OIOS Investigation together with recommendations  for appropriate action by 
UNON Management. 
 
 
II. BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
 
A. UN-SACCO 
 
5. According to information provided in a leaflet, (Attachment 1), UN-SACCO 
was created in 1975, “to establish a forum for Unit ed Nations staff in Kenya to save 
their disposable income and borrow at minimal cost to meet their socio-economic 
needs.” At present, UN-SACCO has a capital of US $ 13.5 million with about 2,500 
members, and is managed by a Management Committee e lected at an annual General 
Meeting of the Society on a renewable three-year te rm.  
 
6. In order to become a UN-SACCO member, a staff me mber of the United 
Nations completes an “Application for Membership” f orm (Attachment 2) and pays a 
fee of Kshs. 500 (about US $ 7). UN-SACCO members o wn shares and can request 
and obtain individual loans after holding membershi p in UN-SACCO for six months.  
Members may apply for a loan up to three times the value of their shares.  The length 
of the loans cannot extend beyond the term of emplo yment by the United Nations.   
  2 7. To obtain an individual loan, a staff member is required to complete either a 
“Loan Application & Loan Agreement Form” (Attachmen t 3) or an “Instant Loan 
Facility Application & Agreement Form” (Attachment 4). The staff member must 
attach to his/her request documents including copie s of his/her latest payslip, National 
Identification Card or Passport and a copy of his/h er letter of contract.  
 
8. A copy of the letter of contract is required to ensure that the applicant holds a 
valid contract, which covers the agreed period of t ime for the repayment of the loan. 
The benefit of a longer contract is that it permits  repayment in lesser amounts over a 
longer period of time.  
 
9. To ensure guarantee of repayment, the applicant must provide up to six 
guarantors in the event of the borrower’s default. The guarantors must also be UN-
SACCO members.  
 
10. The applications for loans are reviewed by UN-S ACCO staff and a Credit 
Committee, which approve, defer, or reject the appl ication.   
 
B. UNICEF/Somalia Fraud 
 
11. On 10 February 2005, while settling the separat ion payment of a former 
locally recruited UNICEF/Somalia staff member, an A dministrative Officer who 
worked on the matter noted that the staff member ha d borrowed a large amount of 
money from UN-SACCO in January 2004 and that at the  time of his/her separation 
s/he still owed UN-SACCO about one-third of the amo unt borrowed.  
 
12. The Administrative Officer learned from UN-SACC O management that the 
loan was granted based upon a letter of appointment  submitted to UN-SACCO by that 
staff member, which showed that his/her contract wo uld be renewed through 31 
December 2006.  However, the contract was actually only from 1 January 2004 to 31 
December 2004. 
 
13. The Administrative Officer requested a copy of the appointment letter and 
found that it was fraudulent, in that the date of t he expiration of the contract was false 
and the signature of a UNICEF Operations Officer na med in the letter was forged. 
Upon further inquiries from UN-SACCO managers, UNIC EF/Somalia Management 
started an inquiry and found that other UNICEF/Soma lia staff members had obtained 
similarly improper loans. UNICEF/Somalia has only a pproximately 20 staff members. 
 
14. The results of this inquiry were described in a  “Report on the preliminary 
investigation of a case of fraudulent signatures an d use of office stationary and 
official seal – UNICEF Somalia, Nairobi”, dated 11 February 2005, which included 
copies of the false letters of appointment and writ ten statements of several locally 
recruited UNICEF staff who admitted their improper conduct. (Attachment 5) 
 
 
III. INVESTIGATIVE DETAILS 
 
C. Interviews with UNICEF staff 
  3 15. Upon request from ID/OIOS, UNICEF Management ag reed to cooperate with 
the ID/OIOS inquiry by providing access to its file s and staff members involved in the 
fraud. However, UNICEF Management insisted, and ID/ OIOS agreed, that ID/OIOS 
interviews of their staff be conducted at UNICEF pr emises and in the presence of two 
Senior UNICEF Managers. The objectives of these int erviews by ID/OIOS were to 
confirm and/or rule out involvement by UNON staff m embers in similar cases and to 
obtain information to ensure that UNON management s afeguard mechanisms to avoid 
similar occurrences at UNON.  
 
16. ID/OIOS could not interview all UNICEF staff or  former staff involved in the 
fraud. For example, one staff member passed away an d another, who had left 
UNICEF, declined the interview. In addition, the UN ICEF inquiry was not final and 
information obtained primarily through the intervie ws of UNICEF staff by ID/OIOS 
suggested that there might be more UNICEF staff inv olved than initially envisaged.     
 
17. During their interviews with ID/OIOS, the conce rned UNICEF staff confirmed 
that they misused UNICEF letterhead and official se al, indicated that they forged the 
signature of a UNICEF Operations officer and that t hey provided UN-SACCO with 
incorrect information about the duration of their c ontracts in order to obtain loans. All 
of them mentioned the ease with which they accessed  official UNICEF stamps, 
stationeries and computers, although given the limi ted responsibilities of some of 
them, for example, the drivers, such access should not have occurred. 
 
18. Further, most interviewees stated that they act ed alone and, with one 
exception, all denied that either their UNICEF or U NON colleagues assisted them in 
their fraudulent activities or had been otherwise a ware of or involved in such 
improper actions.  
 
D. Interviews with UN-SACCO and UNON staff 
 
19. UN-SACCO and UNON staff members interviewed by the ID/OIOS 
Investigators provided general information about th eir operations and otherwise 
cooperated with the ID/OIOS inquiry by providing un hindered access to their files. 
However, these interviews did not produce conclusiv e information to either suggest or 
completely rule out improper conduct on the part of  UNON staff members.  
 
E. Additional Investigative steps 
 
20. Documentation obtained from UN-SACCO shows that  about 2,500 staff 
members from UNON and other United Nations related organizations have requested 
and obtained UN-SACCO loans, about one thousand of whom are UNON staff. Given 
the large number of records to review, which would then need to be compared to 
similar records from UNON, and the absence of any i dentified subjects, the ID/OIOS 
Investigators decided to do a thorough review of a sampling of cases.  Files were 
selected for review where the loan amount was high,  the duration of the contract long, 
or the applicant was also a guarantor on other loan s.  
 
21. Further, whenever the ID/OIOS Investigators not ed apparent irregularities 
concerning letters of appointments or other similar  documents produced by these staff 
to UN-SACCO, for example letters suggesting that th eir contracts would be renewed  4 beyond the expiration date of their contracts, the ID/OIOS officers made copies of 
those documents and compared them with the correspo nding documentation available 
in the Official Status Files of those staff and/or confirmed with UNON officials 
whose signatures appeared on those letters that the y had indeed signed them. 
 
22. The ID/OIOS Investigators noted with concern th at in January 2005, one 
Senior UNEP Manager had informed UN-SACCO managemen t that the contract of a 
particular staff member is likely to be extended fo r a further two years, subject to 
satisfactory performance. During the manager’s inte rview with ID/OIOS, s/he 
admitted s/he had written a letter at the request o f the staff member and advised that 
such letters are sometimes provided to UN-SACCO so that locally recruited staff can 
obtain loans.  ID/OIOS cautions managers that the i ssuance of these letters may give 
the impression that a staff member’s contract will be renewed. 
 
23. In this regard, it should be noted that most, i f not all letters of appointments 
issued by the Organization, provide that fixed-term  appointments do not carry any 
expectation of renewal or of conversion to any othe r type of appointment and expire 
automatically and without prior notice on the expir ation date specified in the letter of 
appointment. 
 
24. This position is consistent with the jurisprude nce of the United Nations 
Administrative Tribunal (UNAT), which has establish ed that good performance by a 
staff member does not by itself create any legitima te expectation for renewal of any 
fixed-term contract (see Judgement 562 dated 2 July  1993).  
 
 
IV. FINDINGS 
 
25. Given the absence of concrete information conce rning improper conduct by 
UNON staff, and based upon the review of a limited number of UN-SACCO and 
UNON files, ID/OIOS finds that, while there is evid ence of improper conduct on the 
part of some UNICEF staff members in obtaining loan s from UN-SACCO, there is no 
evidence that such similar improper conduct also oc curred at UNON.    
 
26. In fact, as noted above, rather than producing information about possible 
involvement of UNON staff in a similar fraud, the i nterviews of UNICEF/Somalia 
staff yielded more information about further possib le UNICEF subjects involved in 
the same type of fraud, who had either not been ide ntified in the UNICEF preliminary 
inquiry or had not been interviewed. Moreover, thes e interviews also suggested 
possible improper conduct by one UNICEF manager, wh o may have contributed to 
the fraud by providing a letter, which suggested th at the contract of one staff would be 
extended further beyond its normal term.    
  5 27. The review of likely candidates for such frauds  ( i.e., those with large loans and 
long contracts) did not produce a single instance o f fraud.  However, ID/OIOS cannot 
exclude the possibility that locally recruited UNON  staff members have submitted 
fraudulent letters to UN-SACCO to obtain loans, as had their UNICEF colleagues. 
Without concrete leads or a thorough review of all of the numerous files of the UNON 
staff members who have obtained UN-SACCO loans, it is not possible to rule out 
similar fraudulent schemes undertaken by UNON staff .  
 
28. ID/OIOS noted with concern the ease with which locally recruited UNICEF 
staff, such as drivers, obtained access to official  UNICEF stamps, stationeries and 
computers. UNON should ensure that there are adequa te controls in place to prevent 
such abuses in UNON.  
 
29. Further, while analysing the fraudulent scheme at UNICEF/Somalia, ID/OIOS 
noted that when requests for letters of appointment  suggesting contract renewal were 
denied, staff members produced fraudulent letters o f appointment which were 
accepted by UN-SACCO management, although they were  clearly different in style 
and format from legitimate letters.  
 
30. Furthermore, as noted above, in one case detect ed by ID/OIOS a letter of 
appointment, which stated that renewal for two year s was subject to satisfactory 
performance, was provided to a UNON staff member.  Such a letter, even from one 
with the authority to do so, is improper, may be us ed to demonstrate a staff member’s 
“right” to a renewal, and should stop immediately.    
 
 
V. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
31. In light of the foregoing, ID/OIOS offers the f ollowing recommendations, 
which could reduce the risk of the occurrences of s imilar fraudulent activities as the 
one described in this report:  
 
Recommendation 1 : It is recommended that UNON Management inform UN-
SACCO Management that henceforth they should requir e original official UNON 
documentation from UNON staff members, and any susp icions about the veracity of 
such documentation should be promptly reported to U NON and the authenticity of 
those documents verified. (ID Rec. No. IV05/050/01)        
 
Recommendation 2:  It is recommended that UNON ascertain if its perso nnel officers 
are aware of instances of staff members requesting letters or documentation averring 
that their contracts would be renewed beyond their expiration dates, and such requests 
were denied.  If so, UNON Management should liaise with UN-SACCO Management   
to determine whether such staff members then submit ted fraudulent documentation to 
obtain loans. (ID Rec. No. IV05/050/02) 
 
Recommendation 3 : It is recommended that UNON Management ensure tha t its 
official UNON seals/stamps are placed in secured pl aces and are used solely by 
authorized UNON officials to prevent the risk of th eir misuse by other persons. (ID 
Rec. IV05/050/03) 
  6 Recommendation 4 : It is recommended that UNON Management requests U N-
SACCO Management to systematically confirm with UNO N Personnel offices any 
information related to employment duration provided  to them by UNON staff 
members. (ID Rec. IV05/050/04) 
 
 
 
----- 
 
                    