NSA Global SIGINT Highlights
US Intercepts of France Complaining About US 
Intercepts of France
WikiLeaks release: June 23, 2015
Top Secret US National Security Agency report on highlights from signals intelligence intercepts of high-
level French government communications. The extract dating from March 24, 2010 summarises 
communications between the French Ambassador in Washington D.C. Pierre Vimont, and French 
President Nicolas Sarkozy's diplomatic advisor Jean-David Levitte. The report reveals various potential 
topics Sarkozy intended to raise with US President Barack Obama during an upcoming meeting in 
Washington. Topping Sarkozy's agenda is his frustration that the US has backed away from a bilaterial 
intelligence cooperation agreement which might restrict the US ability to continue spying on France.  
Other issues include the potential French commitment of military trainers to Afghanistan, a potential 
European Aeronautic Defence and Space Corporation (EADS) contract for tanker aircraft with the US 
military, and a trademark dispute concerning the French spirits company Pernod Ricard. Description
Keywords:National Security Agency, NSA, Top Secret, ORCON, NOFORN,
COMINT, SIGINT, intelligence, intercept, espionage, United States,
USA, France, Afghanistan, Nicolas Sarkozy, Barack Obama, Pernod
Ricard, European Aeronautic Defence and Space Corporation, EADS,
bilateral intelligence cooperation, Middle East Peace Process, Iran,
Pakistan, Yemen, Somalia, the Sahel, Russia, China, Turkey, climate
change
Restraint:TOP SECRET//SIGINT/NOFORN
Title:Global SIGINT Highlights (Executive Version): Sensitive Issues on the
Agenda When French, U.S. Presidents Meet Next Week in Washington
Date:March 24, 2010
Organization:National Security Agency (NSA)
Author:Summary Services Office
Link: https://wikileaks.org/nsa-france/
Pages:1Sensitive Issues on the Agenda When French, U.S. Presidents Meet Next  
Week in Washington (TS//SI//NF)
(TS//SI//NF) French President Sarkozy intends to raise a number of 
sensitive topics with the U.S. President when the two leaders meet in  
Washington on 31 March, according to an exchange last week between 
the French ambassador in Washington Pierre Vimont, and Sarkozy's 
diplomatic advisor, Jean­David Levitte. Vimont conveyed that the 
French President will express his frustration that Washington has 
backed away from its proposed bilateral intelligence cooperation 
agreement and Sarkozy intends to continue to push for closure. As 
Vimont and Levitte understand it, the main sticking point is the U.S.  
desire to continue spying on France. On the topic of Afghanistan, 
Levitte noted that Sarkozy is ready to authorize more military 
trainers but wants clarification on how many are needed, given the 
conflicting figures from U.S. sources. Another proposed topic was 
efforts by the European Aeronautic, Defense, and Space Corporation 
(EADS) to win a tanker aircraft contract with the U.S. military. 
Vimont revealed cryptically that the deal is moving forward but did 
not provide any details. Levitte had not expected to put the labeling  
dispute with Pernod Ricard (the world's second largest spirits group)  
on the agenda, but Sarkozy had just spoken to the company's chairman 
who had asked the president to intercede on his behalf. (COMMENT: 
Patrick Ricard, chairman of the Pernod Ricard board of directors, is 
said to be one of Sarkozy's wealthy backers.) Vimont characterized 
the issue as a very political matter in the U.S., and suggested that 
a direct appeal to the White House might be useful. While Sarkozy 
intends to broach the issue with the U.S. President, Levitte will 
talk to the U.S. President's Economic Adviser and Deputy National 
Security Adviser. Finally, Levitte expected the two leaders to 
discuss other pressing subjects including Iran, the Middle East Peace  
Process, Afghanistan and Pakistan, Yemen, Somalia, the Sahel, Russia,  
China, Turkey, climate change, and the financial situation of several  
European countries; however, he provided no details on those topics.
Unconventional
French diplomatic
Z­3/OO/507179­10, 231635Z