UNITED NATIONS  
United Nations Interim 
Administration Mission in Kosovo  
  
UNMIK NATIONS UNIES 
Mission d’Administration Intérimaire 
des Nations Unies au Kosovo  
Investigation Task Force 
 
 
Irregularities in the addition of a single source c ontract one month after the 
award of a contract for the supply of two new conta iners and the dismantling, 
transport and re-construction of a further seven co ntainers at Pristina Airport  
(Case 0281/04) 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
1. This case arises out of an audit report dated 28  February 2003 into the financial 
statements of Pristina International Airport conduc ted by the Chartered 
Accountants which led to an investigation concernin g alleged corruption and 
irregularities arising in the course of procurement s and contracts at Pristina 
International Airport. 
 
2. It is alleged that a single source contract for one container was added one month 
after a main contract for the supply of two new con tainers and the dismantling, 
transport and re-construction of a further seven co ntainers at Pristina Airport. 
 
 
II. METHODOLOGY 
 
3. This investigation was conducted pursuant to Exe cutive Decision No 2003/16 on 
the establishment of the Investigation Task Force. The ITF investigators 
conducted an enquiry into the allegations raised by  interviews with persons 
indicated to be witnesses and persons potentially i mplicated in the allegations; by 
obtaining documents from the Pristina Airport admin istration and from Pillar IV, 
which were then analysed for relevance to the inqui ry at hand. 
 
 
III. BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
 
4. Pristina International Airport constitutes a sta te owned enterprise under 
Yugoslavian law. The assets of the airport include the runways, terminal 
buildings, hanger, fuel storage facilities and equi pment. During the period 
covered by this investigation, from 2001 until 2003 , they were maintained by the 
Public Enterprise Airport Pristina, (PEAP) in coope ration with Military Units of the 
Kosovo Force (KFOR). Pursuant to United Nations Sec urity Council Resolution 
1244 dated 10 June 1999, and UNMIK Regulation No 1/ 1999 dated 25 July 1999. 
UNMIK is mandated to administer the territory of Ko sovo, including state owned 
and publicly owned assets. This includes Pristina I nternational Airport. 
 
5. On 1 July 2002, the responsibility for the admin istration of the Airport passed 
from Pillar II to the Kosovo Trust Agency (KTA) and  Pillar IV. The KTA Divisional 
Manager was appointed to the Airport Sector, KTA at  the same time. Under him  
 
  2 
 
were the PEAP Official and the ACTS Official. 
 
6. On 1 April 2004 Pristina International Airport, which had until that time been 
under the jurisdiction of KFOR was handed over to c ivilian jurisdiction, under 
ICAO regulations. 
 
7. It is against this background of change that pro curement procedures relating to 
the following contract have been examined. 
 
IV. INVESTIGATION DETAILS  
 
8. This investigation relates to a Contract, for th e supply of two new containers and 
the dismantling, transport and re- construction of a further seven containers at 
Pristina Airport. It also deals with a further sing le source contract for the supply of 
a further container. The value of the contract is € 24,762 and the supplementary 
contract €4,100. 
 
9. It is alleged that there were irregularities in the addition of a single source 
contract one month after the award of the main cont ract. In addition, there did not 
appear to be any capital expenditure approval or pa yment order on file. 
 
10. Evidence contained in a bid evaluation report d ated 29 August 2002 indicates 
that a competitive tender was held on 29 August 200 2 for the supply of two new 
containers and the dismantling, transport and re-co nstruction of a further seven 
containers at Pristina Airport.  
 
11. Following a competitive tender, the contract wa s awarded to the Vendor who 
submitted the lowest bid in the sum of €24,762. A c ontract was signed with the 
company on 29 August 2002.  
 
12. On 4 September 2002, a further single source co ntract was signed by the KTA 
Divisional Manager for the supply of an additional container. This appears to 
have resulted from a direct request from KFOR signe d by the KFOR Official of Air 
Movements, dated 3 September 2002, which is attache d to the justification for the 
single source contract.  
 
13. The tender file does not contain either a justi fication memorandum or financial 
approval documents for the main contract and those documents have not been 
locate by the ITF. 
 
V. CONCLUSIONS  
 
14. A competitive tender appears to have been corre ctly held for the main contract 
and the addition of the single source contract to a dd a further container appears 
to be justified. However, there is an absence of pr oper records detailing events 
that gave rise to the competitive tender, together with an absence of documents 
confirming that financial approval was sought. 
 
15. Both the contracts and the justification for th e single source contract appear to 
have been signed by the KTA Divisional Manager. 
 
  3 
 
16. In the absence of further documents it is not p ossible to indicate whether or not 
there were irregularities in the financial approval  procedure. 
 
 
VI. RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
17. It is recommended that UNMIK refer this matter to the D/SRSG of Pillar IV for any 
action deemed appropriate with regard to the manage ment of contract files. 
(IV04/281/01) 
 
 